PERSONNEL PSYCHOLOGY
 1983,36




ECONOMIC CONSIDERATIONS IN ESTIMATING THE
UTILITY OF HUMAN RESOURCE PRODUCTIVITY
IMPROVEMENT PROGRAMS
                            JOHN W. BOUDREAU
             New York State School of Industrial and Labor Relations
                              Comeil University



        Three economic concepts (variable costs, taxes, and discount-
     ing) are applied and incorporated into the previous utility formulas
     proposed by Brogden (1946, 1949), Cronbach and Gieser (1965),
     and Schmidt, et al. (1979. 1982). The resulting utility model
     indicates that the previous formulas are deficient and can produce
     upwardly biased utility estimates. Empirical examples based on
     published research (e.g., Schmidt, et al., 1982) are presented
     indicating the substantial magnitude of the bias given realistic
     levels of variable costs, taxes, and discount rates. The present
     utility model is used to adjust for such bias and is shown to provide
     a more complete and precise utility definition. Implications for
     future research are discussed.


   THE utility or payoff derived from using improved selection
procedures has received a great deal of recent attention (e.g., Bobko
and Karren, 1982; Cascio, 1980, 1982; Cascio and Silbey, 1979;
Landy, Farr and Jacobs, 1982; Schmidt, Hunter and Pearlman,
1982; Schmidt, Hunter, McKenzie and Muldrow, 1979). The basic
utility equation was developed through Brogden's (1949) study of
testing costs, Brogden's (1946) observations on validity, and Cron-
bach and Gleser's (1965) discussion of decision theory applied to
employee selection. Cascio (1980), Schmidt, et al. (1979) and Hunter
and Schmidt (1982b) reviewed this theoretical development.

  The author gratefully acknowledges the suggestions of Lee Dyer, Robert Eder,
George Milkovich, John Hunler. Joe Rich, and two anonymous reviewers.
  Requests for reprints should be sent to John W. Boudreau, Department of
Personnel and Human Resource Studies. NYSSILR, Cornell Universiiy, 393 Ives
Hall, Ithaca. New York 14853.
Copyright ® 1983 Personnel Psychology, Inc.

                                          551


--- PAGE BREAK ---

552                 PERSONNEL PSYCHOLOGY

  The resulting utility formula is:
                                  .:vZ,) - C                      (I)
Where:
At/ = the increase in average dollar-value payoff that results from
       selecting N employees using a test or procedure (.v) instead
       of selecting randomly,
  N = the number of employees selected,
   T = the expected tenure of the selected group,
 r^y = the correlation coefficient (among prescreened applicants)
       between predictor score U) and dollar-value payoff (v).
SDy = the standard deviation of dollar-value payoff in the group of
       prescreened applicants,
  Zx = the average standard predictor score of the selected group,
       and
   C ~ the total selection cost for all applicants.
   In a recent Personnel Psychology article, Schmidt, et al. (1982)
extended the utility model of Equation 1 (for selection utility) to
apply to any personnel program designed to increase the job
performance of those treated by the program. They showed that the
product of r^.y and Z^ in Equation 1 may be replaced by the "true
difference in job performance" between the treated and untreated
group in standard deviation units. The resulting utility formula may
be written
                     AU = {iV){T){d,)(SDy) - C                     (2)
Where:
Af/ = is the increase in utility resulting from the program,
  N = the number treated,
   T = the expected duration of benefits in the treated group,
  d, = the true difference in job performance between the treated
        and untreated groups in standard deviation units,
SDy - the standard deviation of dollar-valued job performance
        among the incumbent employees, and
   C = is the cost of treating N employees.
   The Schmidt, et al. (1982) extensions of the selection utility model
(and their demonstration applying utility analysis to a training
intervention) provided an important contribution, paving the way
for utility analyses of other personnel programs. Landy, et al.
(1982). for example, used the Schmidt, et al. (1982) formula to
analyze the utility of a performance feedback program. It appears
likely that utility analysis and estimation will play an increasingly
greater role in industrial-organizational psychology research and,
perhaps, in practice. Indeed, Landy et al. (1982, p. 38) suggest that


--- PAGE BREAK ---

                                JOHN W. BOUDREAU                                     553

Utility analysis may be capable of "providing the science of person-
nel research with a more traditional 'bottom line' interpretation."
   Such an interpretation requires a utility model which incorporates
the same economic considerations applied to traditional manage-
ment decisions. Investments in personnel programs must be evaluat-
ed similarly to other investment options so that their bottom line
implications can be readily compared. Previous conceptual contri-
butions (e.g., Brogden, 1946, 1949; Cronbach and Gieser, 1965),
most recently exemplified by the Schmidt, et al. (1982) extensions,
have integrated decision theory and industrial psychology concepts,
but have devoted far less attention to economic theory and its
implications. This can be seen most clearly in the definition of the
payoff"function (v). Schmidt, et al. (1982) estimated SD,. based on an
earlier study defining payoff as the "value of products and services"
(Schmidt, et al., 1979), This payoff function has been interpreted as
the value of "output as sold," what the employer "charges the
customer" (Hunter and Schmidt. 1982b, pp. 268-269), or as a
function having an average level of twice the salary of the "typical
worker" (Schmidt, et al., 1982, p. 339). Cascio and Silbey (1979) and
Bobko and Karren (1982) defined their payoff functions simply as
the "value of sales." In this article, the value of output "as sold"
will be called the "sales value" of productivity.
   For several reasons, this payoff definition is a deficient expression
of the "institutional" benefit (Cronbach and Gieser, 1965, p. 8) of
treating a group of applicants or employees. The definition fails to
reflect certain economic concepts which are basic to organizational
investment decisions. Utility estimates using this deficient payoff
definition may produce large (possibly upward) biases compared to
payoff estimates for other investments.
   The utility model extensions presented here suggest corrections
for three of these deficiencies. The present utility model will
incorporate three economic concepts into existing decision-theoret-
ic utility models and demonstrate the effect of these concepts on
previous utility estimates. The three economic concepts (in the
order of their presentation) are variable costs, taxes, and discount-
ing.
   The effects of each concept will be illustrated in three ways. First,
by incorporating each concept into the algebraic utility formula
(Equation 1).' Second, by presenting research propositions indicat-

   ' Though Equation I is expressed in terms of validity (r,..,' and ihe average
standard predictor score of selectees (Z,). the algebraic derivations developed here
generalizes to Equation 2 ifd, is substituted for the product of r, ,, andZ,. For brevity,
the derivations are shown only for Equation 1.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

554                  PERSONNEL PSYCHOLOGY

ing each concept's implications for utility estimation. Third, by
empirically illustrating the effects of each concept using data from
previously-published utility research. Data from the recently pub-
lished utility study by Schmidt, et al. (1982) will provide the primary
example, but other published data will be used where they illustrate
a specific eflfect. It will be shown that these three economic
considerations (both alone and in combination) identify deficiencies
in the existing utility definition which can upwardly bias existing
utility estimates. The more complete utility model proposed here
provides a framework for identifying and correcting such biases in
future research, and suggests new research directions.

                   The Effects of Variable Costs
  When a decision which increases productivity (e.g., adopting a
selection device) also increases/decreases variable costs associated
with productivity, then the change in variable costs should be
subtracted from/added to the increased value generated by the
increased productivity. For example, better-selected sales people
may perform better by selling more units. Undoubtedly, the sales
revenue would be higher, but not all of this increased revenue
accrues to the firm. Higher-producing salespeople often receive
higher pay in the form of a bonus or commission. Similarly, higher
sales levels often require larger inventories, increased material
costs, and production costs. In these cases, the benefits of the
increased productivity are less than the increase in sales revenue.
Conversely, in some jobs employees who produce at higher levels
may also incur less costs than their lower-producing counterparts.
For example, drill press operators who produce more units may also
produce less scrap than those producing fewer units. Thus, variable
costs which vary positively with productivity offset the sales value
of the increased productivity while variable costs which vary
inversely with productivity augment the sales value of the increased
productivity.

Algebraic Derivation: Variable Costs
   Analytically, distinguishing the sales value and cost of productivi-
ty gains due to treatments requires redefining y, the payoff function
in Equation 1. Boudreau and Berger (in press) develop a model of
the utility of employee movements through organizations (selection
is one type of movement) which supplies useful concepts for
developing this point. The model proposes that each movement


--- PAGE BREAK ---

                          JOHN W. BOUDREAU                             555

produces (among other effects) changes in both sales value [sv/, the
stream of present and future benefits (e.g.. sales revenue) provided
by the mover^ (selectee in this case) during his/her tenure in the job
or organization] and service costs [scj, the stream of present and
future sacrifices (e.g., wages, benefits, materials) incurred to main-
tain, support, and induce those services]. The difference between svj
and scj will be termed the net betxefits of the movement (i.e., nhj =
SVj -   SCj).
  Thus, sv, sc and tjb are random variables over the population of
prescreened applicants (or incumbents in the case of programs for
existing employees). Net benefits (nb) is proposed here as a more
logically correct definition of payoff (v in Equation I) than sv alone,
sc alone, or any other combination of them. Algebraically. Equation
1 becomes
                  Af/ = (A0(7)(r,,^^)(Z,)(5D,,^) - C                (3)
  Moreover, it can be shown that Equation 3 is equivalent to
        At/ = iN)iT)[(rr.sv)(Z,)iSD,,) - (r,,,,)(Z^)(5Av.)] " C         (4)
   Equation 4 recognizes that a selection device (x). in addition to
correlating with sales value, may also correlate with service costs.
These correlations need not be equal. For example, sv may reflect
the value of increased production speed of selectees. Some service
costs may vary positively with production speed (e.g., materials,
piece-rate wages) while others may vary inversely (e.g., supervision
required). Equation 4 is general enough to include situations where
data on both types of variable costs exist. It can also include
situations where cost reduction (in addition to or instead of revenue
enhancement) is the major payoff associated with a selection device.
   In many situations, it may be simpler to treat service costs as
perfectly correlated with sales value. In this case /•,.„„- is equal to the
absolute value of r,..,<- If sc is further treated as a proportion of sv
(e.g.. where commissions equal a percent of sales revenue or
variable materials costs comprise a percent of selling price) then
Equation 4 becomes
                At/ - (A0(r)(r,.,,)(Z,)(5D,,)(l + V) - C               (5)
Where V equals the proportion of .sv represented by sc (i.e., ,scfsv =
V). This parameter (V) will be negative when a higher proportion of
costs varies positively with sales value, and positive when a higher
proportion of costs varies negatively with sales value. For simplic-
ity, and because operational data on variable costs may often be
expressed as a proportion of revenue. Equation 5 will serve as the
basis for further discussion.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

556                 PERSONNEL PSYCHOLOGY

Research Propositions: Variahle Costs

   Existing literature inconsistently (and often incorrectly) addresses
the role of costs in selection utility. The present discussion will
focus first on fixed costs (those not varying with changes in
productivity) then on wages, and finally on other variable costs.
   Fixed costs.
   P\: Utility estimates based on profit including allocated fixed
        costs will underestimate variability in net benefits.
   Fixed costs are irrelevant to utility. From an economic and
decision theoretic standpoint, the utility of any decision or action
(e.g., use of a selection device) reflects the changes that action
brings to various outcomes. In the classic utility framework (Cron-
bach and Gleser, 1965) the phenomenon of interest is the change in
payoff (At/) resulting from selecting using a particular device instead
of selecting randomly. Costs or benefits which do not change as a
result of a program have no role in defining the utility of that
program.
   The pioneering work by Brogden fI949). Brogden and Taylor
(1950, p. 143). and Tiffin and McCormick (1958, p. 25) does not
reflect this fact. All three studies propose that less overhead '"per
unit produced'' should be "prorated" to efficient workers (those
producing more output per time unit). This proposition implies that
accounting allocations of fixed costs reflect actual cost differences,
an implication clearly at odds with economic and financial decision
theory (see Brealey and Myers. 1981, p. 86). An organization will
incur fixed utility costs, overhead costs, etc., just to continue in
operation. Personnel programs generally will not change this. While
fixed costs lower the average profit obtained from all workers, fixed
cost variability is zero, and 5/)^/, is the same whether nh reflects
fixed costs or not. This observation implies that Roche (1961)
probably underestimated selection utility by allocating profit (reve-
nue minus both fixed and variable costs) to workers according to
production speed.
  Just as fixed costs are irrelevant to decisions, variable cost
relationships which are not reflected in decisions are also irrelevant.
For example, suppose compensation is based not on productivity
but on seniority. Further, suppose seniority (tenure) is negatively
related to productivity. [This assumption provides an extreme
example. In fact, Gordon and Johnson (1982) conclude that little
evidence exists to estimate the actual perform ance-tenure relation-
ship.] Under these assumptions, data from the incumbent employee
population would indicate a negative correlation between compen-


--- PAGE BREAK ---

                        JOHN W. BOUDREAU                          557

salion and productivity. One might be templed to reflect this in
utility estimates by increasing V to reflect the proportion of sales
value represented by seniority-related variable compensation costs.
This would be incorrect, however. Productivity improvement pro-
grams (e.g., training, selection) affect the prodttctivity not the
seniority of treated employees. Higher-performing trainees, for
example, would not suffer decreased seniority, so there would be no
reason to expect a compensation cost saving to accrue as a result of
training even though such a relationship exists in the incumbent
population.
   In general, it is important to include in the variable cost term (V)
only those costs which will vary with the increases in sales value
prodtaed hy the program options tinder consideration. In view of
this principle, it seems unlikely that compensation costs would vary
negatively with productivity improvements induced by personnel
programs. Therefore, subsequent sections will address only the
effects of positive or zero covariation between compensation and
productivity (sales value).
   Salary and benefits.
   p2. When salaries and benefits vary positively with sales value
        (jv) then the standard deviation of sales value (5Avv) will
        overestimate the standard deviation of net benefits iSD^h)-
   Salary and benefit payments to individuals may relate to sv
through many mechanisms. Clearly, when individuals are paid on
commission or piece rate, or when bonuses are linked to output, the
increased productivity achieved (e.g., through better selection) is
partly offset by higher direct compensation. Where better perform-
ers progress upward through a pay range faster than poorer perform-
ers a similar effect would occur. In addition to direct compensation,
benefits may also be associated with performance. For example,
higher direct pay often means higher employer pension contribu-
tions, social security payments, or insurance levels {and premiums).
   The more salary and benefit costs which are positively related to
sales value, the lower is V in Equation 5, the lower SD,,f,, and the
lower is AU. Belcher (1974, p. 511) suggests that incentives may
comprise 10% to 35% of total compensation of salespeople. If
average sales value is twice average wage (as Hunter and Schmidt,
 1982a, p. 305; 1982b, p. 208 suggest) then incentive costs may
comprise 5% to 17% of sv. As shown by Equation 5, if V equals
 -.17, then the actual SD,,,, is 83% of .SD,,,,.
    Existing research often ignores potential variable compensation
 effects. Cascio and Silbey (1979). Landy, et al. (1982). Lee and
 Booth (1974), Roche (1961), Schmidt, et al. (1979. 1982). Schmidt


--- PAGE BREAK ---

558                  PERSONNEL PSYCHOLOGY

 and Hoffman (1973). and Van Naersson (1963) presented utility
 analyses with no discussion of the possibility that variable compen-
 sation costs may offset increased sales value. While such treatment
 may have been appropriate in some studies due to the likelihood that
 all job holders were paid similarly, the analytical issue was not
 explored and no data were presented to justify such an approach.
 One study (Cascio and Silbey, 1979) defined the payoff function iy)
 for sales managers in terms of sales revenue. It seems likely that, for
 this job. some portion of compensation took the form of incentive
 pay.
    Another misconception regarding the role of wages in selection
 utility is that wages equal sales value. This position was taken by
 Brogden and Taylor (1950, p. 144). More recently, Cascio (1982, p.
 163-i73) described the Cascio-Ramos estimate of performance in
 dollars (CREPID) which is based on the assumption that "the
economic value of each employee's labor is best reflected in his or
 her annual wage or salary" (Cascio, 1982. p. 164). For analyzing
 utility to the organization, however, the appropriate "economic
 value" is not the wage (defined by the labor market), but the value
of what is produced (determined by the product/service market)
adjusted for variable costs (and other factors discussed subsequent-
ly). As Hunter and Schmidt (1982b, p. 268) pointed out. "any
accountant would assure you that a business in which dollar value of
output is equal to wages would be unable to pay costs and overhead,
[much] less profit." Hunter and Schmidt (1982b) were distinguishing
wages from sales value, while the present utility model distinguishes
wages from net benefits. In either case, wages are a cost. When they
vary positively with sales value they are a cost which reduces the
value of SD,,i,.
    Variable costs other than compensation. The general proposition
regarding other variable costs is similar to proposition P2.
   Py. When non-compensation costs vary positively with sales
        value (.sv) then the standard deviation of sales value (5/),.)
        will overestimate the standard deviation of net benefits
        (SDnh)^ and vice versa.
The major non-compensation cost which varies with the sales value
of productivity (sv) will probably be raw material costs. For
example, production workers producing higher volume may require
more raw materials to work with. Similarly, sales people producing
higher sales volume require that more units be available for sale.
Hunter and Schmidt (1982a. p. 304) note that "increased production
by the worker might result in increased [overhead] costs of produc-
tion; especially if the product has a high raw material cost." They do


--- PAGE BREAK ---

                         JOHN W. BOUDREAU                           559

not, however, include such costs explicitly in the utility model as is
done here.
    Interpreting proposition Pi, in terms of Equation 5: When the
amount of non-compensation costs varying positively is larger, V is
smaller (or more negative), the value of SD,,h is smaller, and MJ is
less. As noted above, variable compensation costs might make Vas
low as -.17. Non-compensation costs which vary positively with sv
would further reduce V. The exact amount of the reduction would
vary (across jobs and industries for example). Assuming (for illustra-
tion) a range of non-compensation variable costs from 0% to 33% of
sales value, and adding this effect to the variable compensation cost
range of 0% to 17% implies that when both compensation and non-
compensation costs vary positively with increases in sales value. V
could range from 0 to -.50.
    As noted earlier, some non-compensation costs (e.g., scrap,
damage, losses) may vary inversely rather than positively with
increases in sales value produced by personnel programs. When all
variable non-compensation costs behave in this way, V could reach
an upper value of + .33. (Recall the earlier argument that compensa-
tion costs are unlikely to vary negatively with productivity in-
creases).
    Total variahle cost effects. Combining al! the arguments in this
 section implies a range of V (including variable compensation costs,
and positively-related as well as negatively-related non-compensa-
 tion costs) from -.50 to +.33. This range implies an adjustment
 (1 +Vin Equation 5) ranging from .50 to 1.33. The actual value of V
 in any application would be the difference between the proportion of
 sales value represented by costs varying negatively with sales value
 increases and the proportion of sales value represented by costs
 varying positively with sales value increases.

Empirical Illustrations: Variable Costs
  The empirical efFects of variable costs will be illustrated using data
reported by Schmidt, et al. (1982) and data reported by Cascio and
Silbey (1979). The Schmidt, et al. (1982) utility analysis for training
computer programmers (using Equation 2 with N ^ 100, 7 = 2
years, d, = .65, SD, = $10,413. and C = $500 per trainee) produced
an estimate of the training program's utility equal to $1,303,690 (p.
339). Their example ignores variable costs, however. For computer
programmers, variable costs may be low because productivity
increases may not require increased raw materials or overhead and
programmers may not be rewarded differently. Assuming the net


--- PAGE BREAK ---

560                  PERSONNEL PSYCHOLOGY

effect of positively and negatively correlated variable costs produce
V equal to -.05, the after-cost utility estimate based on SDy of
$9,892 [i.e.. ($IO,413)(1-.O5)] would be $1,235,960. or 94.8% of the
reported utility estimate.
   Unlike the Schmidt, et al. (1982) study in which the bias due to
omitting variable costs was probably small, the study by Cascio and
Silbey (1979) focused on sales managers, a job in which variable
costs are likely to have been more substantial. Cascio and Silbey
(1979, p. Ill) estimated the utility of improved internal selection
(i.e.. replacing an interview with an assessment center) to be
$153,855 [assuming N equal to 50. Tequal to 5, SDy equal to $9,500,
Zr equal to .80 (i.e., a selection ratio of .50), assessment center
validity of .35, interview validity of .25. and a cost difference of
$11,328 in favor of the interview], ln this case, SD, (estimated using
the "dollar value of sales to the company") was for the job of sales
manager. Such sales positions would probably be paid (at least in
part) on commission or incentive. In addition, it seems likely that
raw materials costs for this "food and beverage firm'" would also
increase with increased sales. Cascio and Silbey report no data on
this point, but. for illustration, let us assume that V equals -.40 in
this situation. The SD,,^ value would be $5,700 [i.e., ($9.500)(.60)] as
opposed to $9,500 estimated by Cascio and Silbey. Thus, the
adjusted utility estimate would be $87,782. or 57% of the reported
value.

                        The Effects of Taxes
   Just as variable costs are an economic fact of life for many
organizations, so taxes are also an often unavoidable obligation
(except for the government and other exceptions discussed later).
Yet. the effect of taxes has never been addressed in previous utility
research. Taxes are assessed on an organization's reported profits.
Thus, unlike variable costs which offset changes in revenue, taxes
produce a proportional reduction in both revenue and costs.
   Accounting for taxes in personnel program utility estimates is
necessary for two reasons. First, as noted earlier, one purpose of
utility analysis is to provide a "bottom line interpretation" for
investments in personnel programs so that they can be compared to
other investment options. Because taxes affect the flow of costs and
benefits from investments, a basic principle in capita! budgeting
analysis is that after-tax costs and benefits are the appropriate basis
for decisions (see Horngren, 1981. p. 321; Weston and Brigham.
1978. pp. 304-305; Bierman and Smidt. 1971, p. 123). Second,


--- PAGE BREAK ---

                         JOHN W, BOUDREAU                          561

because organizations vary in their tax liability, inter-organizationa!
utility comparisons require adjusting utility values to account for
different tax consequences. The marginal tax rate (the tax rate
applicable to changes in reported profits generated by a decision) is
the appropriate adjustment because existing utility definitions ex-
press the effects of personnel programs on productivity "as sold"
and on costs, both of which usually directly affect reported profits.

Algebraic Derivation: Taxes
  Recall that net benefits inh) is defined as the random variable
representing sales value minus service costs. If we denote the
marginal tax rate as TAX. then after-tax net benefits may be denoted
{\~TAX){nb). Noting that nh was earlier defined as (H-V)(A»'). we
can rewrite Equation 5 as
                                                   - (C){\-TAX)     (6)
Taxes produce a proportional decrease in SD,,h imd in C. Because
SD^h is usually greater than C. this will usually reduce At/.

Research Proposition: Taxes
   P4: The higher an organization's marginal tax rate, the lower
        utility will be (all else equal).
   In order to examine actual tax effects, researchers must obtain
estimates of the marginal tax rate. This requires the input of an
organization's accountants or financial experts. Although the feder-
al corporate income tax rate ranges from 0% to 46% (U.S. Master
Tax Guide. 1981), this range omits the effects of additional State tax
liabilities. Copeland and Dasher (1974. p. 226) assume a 55%
combined tax rate for their illustrations. Therefore, a range of
marginal tax rates (TAX) from 0% to 55% will be assumed here. This
implies an adjustment (i-TAX, in Equation 6) ranging from 1.0 to
.45.

Empirical Illustrations: Combined Effects of Variable Costs and
Taxes
   The combined effects of variable costs and taxes on utility can be
seen in Table I. This table shows the adjustment li.e.,
(i + V)(\-TAX) in Equation 6] necessary to account for various
combinations of variable cost (VO and tax (TAX) levels.
   The implications of Table I can be illustrated by returning to the


--- PAGE BREAK ---

562                            PERSONNEL PSYCHOLOGY

                                    TABLE I
 Illustrative Adjustments to Correct Utility Estimates for the Combined Effects of
                        Variable Costs (Vj and Taxes (TAX)
                                                            TAX
  V                0                .05              .10             .30             .45             .55
  .33             1.33             L26               1.20            .93             .73             .60
  .10             LlO              1.04               .99            .77             .60             .50
  .05             1.05             LOO                .94            .74             .58             .47
  .00             1.00              .95               .90            .70             .55             .45
-.05               .95              .90               .86            .68             .52             .43
-.10               .90              .86               .81            .63             .50             .40
-.20               .80              .76               .72            .56             .44             .36
-.30               .70              .67               .63            .49             .39             .32
-.40               .60              .57               .54            .42             .33             .27
-.50               .50              .48               .45            .35             .28             .22
  Noic—Table values equald + V)(l - MAI. These values would be muliiplied hy the sales value or increased
productivity lo adjusl for variable cosis and [axes.



earlier examples. Assuming variable costs of 5%, it was noted that
the Schmidt, et al. (1982) SD,. estimate of $10,413 would be reduced
to an SD,,f, of $9,892. Though the Schmidt, et al. estimate of 5Ov was
originally derived for the federal government (which is not taxed),
generalizing the results to private-sector taxable organizations re-
quires recognizing the tax rale. Assuming a marginal tax rate of
45%, their SDy estimate would be further reduced to $5,415 [i.e.,
(.52)($10,413) using Table 1]. In addition, their estimated treatment
cost of $500 per person corresponds to an after-lax cost of $275 per
person [i.e., (.55)($5OO)]. Substituting these values into equation 6
along with the other parameters noted by Schmidt, et al. (1982)
produces a total utility estimate of $676,450 for one application of
the training program. This value equals 52% of the $1,303,690
reported by Schmidt, et al. (1982), though it is still a substantial
payoflF.
   The Cascio and Silbey (1979) study of selection utility not only
involved a job (sales manager) probably subject to high variable
costs, but involved a private-sector organization probably subject to
taxes. Assuming a 45% tax rate in addition to the 40% variable cost
level assumed earlier, the yearly SDy estimate after variable costs
and taxes would have been $3,135 [i.e., (.33)($9.500) using Table 1].
The difference in cost between the assessment center and the
interview would also be reduced from $! 1,328 to $6,230 after taxes.
Holding the other parameters at the levels noted earlier, the
resulting payoff from the assessment center would be $48,280. Still
substantial, but only 31% of the $153,855 reported by Cascio and
Silbey (1979).


--- PAGE BREAK ---

                        JOHN W. BOUDREAU                          563

                     The Effects of Discounting
  The third economic consideration is that monetary values re-
ceived in different time periods are subject to different opportunity
costs. Specifically, future monetary values cannot be directly equat-
ed with present monetary values because benefits received in the
present or costs delayed into the future would be invested to earn
returns. Thus, a dollar received today at a 6% annual return would
be worth $1.12 in two years. A future benefit worth $1.12 received in
two years, then, has a "present value" of $1.00 li.e., ($1.12)/
(1.06)-]. Similarly, a future cost of $1.12 in two years could be paid
by investing $1.00 at 6% interest today. In general, the formula for
the present value {PV) of an amount (a) received or paid out (t)
periods in the future, at a rate of return (/) may be written:
                        PVia) = t!/(l + O'(a)]                     (7)
   The principle of discounting becomes relevant because personnel
program utility involves benefits and costs which accrue over time.
Many previously published studies ignore this fact. For example,
Roche (1961) computed utility per hour for radial drill operators,
Brogden (1949) used cost data from Tiffin (1942) based on one year's
salary for hosiery loopers. Van Naersson (1963) used the cost of otte
year's accidents and driver training, and Schmidt and Hoffman
(1973) computed replacement cost savings for one year's separa-
tions. As Hunter and Schmidt (1982b, p. 252) noted, such measures
are deficient because they fail to refiect that "productivity gains due
to increased job performance continue to accumulate for as long as
the employee remains on the job."
   Some studies have explicitly dealt with the accrual of utility over
time. Cascio and Silbey (1979) acknowledged this effect by express-
ing SDy (accruing over five years, with a correlation of .70 between
any two years) as the one-year SDy times 4.36 (i.e., VT9). Schmidt,
et al. (1979) simply multiplied the one-year payoff [{t\y){Zy){SDy)]
by the average tenure of computer programmers (9.69 years). Both
Schmidt, et al. (1982) and Landy. et al. (1982) also simply multiplied
by the number of periods over which benefits occur. None of these
studies incorporated the effects of discounting.


Algebraic Derivation: Discounting
   Including the accrual of benefits and costs over time and the
effects of discounting requires altering the formula for net benefits.
Total net benefits for individual, (nbi,sum)j) may be written as the


--- PAGE BREAK ---

564                  PERSONNEL PSYCHOLOGY

sum of a Stream of net benefits occurring over T future periods,
                                     T
                       nb{sum)j = 2 ribj,                           (8)

where t signifies the time period in which the net benefits occur.
Thus, nbisum) is actually a random variable over individuals defined
by the sum of period-to-period net benefits for each individual. To
account for a discount rate (0, we may write
                                 T
               PV[nbisum)] = ^ («^)[I/(I + O'j                 (9)
                                 /=(
Which is the correct expression for the pre-tax payoff function in
light of the economic concept of discounted present value.
   Defining net benefits in this way. Equation 6 now becomes

AU= (N)




         - TAX)                                                    (10)

Finally, if we note the effects of variable costs by expressing SD^^ as
the product of SD,,. and 1 + V, we may write

      (N)




Equation 11 indicates that the analytically correct expression for the
utility accruing from applying a personnel program to a group of
employees involves not one constant payoff level li.e..
(rx,y)(Z_^)(SDy) in Equation 1]. but a series of discounted yearly
payoffs which may vary over time.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

                         JOHN W. BOUDREAU                            565

   To isolate the effects of the discount rate, let us ignore variability
in Tr.jv, and SD,,. over time, treating them as constants (/•,,,.,. and
SD,^. respectively). This same assumption is implied by Schmidt, et
al. (1979, 1982) and Cascio and Silbey (1979). For purposes of
analytical development, let us also assume the variable cost level
(V,) and tax rate (TAX,) are constant over time. Thus, we may
rewrite Equation 11 as




X i         [1/(1
      i=\




- (C)(l - TAX)                                                      (12)

   Note that Equation 12 assumes that the costs of a program (O
occur only at the beginning of the program (/=0) and thus are not
subject to discounting (when t=0, PV(a) = a). This is usually true
for selection programs where all testing occurs prior to hiring.
Schmidt, et al. (1982. p. 341) noted, however, that some personnel
programs (e.g. sensitivity training) may require a continuing inter-
vention in every period. They proposed multiplying the cost term
(O by 7". In light of the present discussion of discounting, a more
correct approach would be to multiply the cost term by the discount
factor

                                       +

to note that program costs as well as payoflFs are subject to
opportunity costs of time. Costs which occur later affect the present
value of utility less strongly than more immediate costs.

Research Proposition: Discounting
  P-i. The larger the discount rate (/), the lower the utility of a
       personnel program (all else equal).
  Including the .effect of discounting on utility estimates requires
estimating the appropriate discount rate. Ogan (1976, p. 310) states,
*The discount rate may be the average interest rate on U.S.
Government securities or any other externally determined, objec-


--- PAGE BREAK ---

566                  PERSONNEL PSYCHOLOGY

tive factor." This definition is inappropriate for purposes of utility
analysis for two reasons. First, Ogan's (1976) model estimates the
value of "human assets" on a "nominal" basis (that is, in dollars
which may include inflation effects). Previous utility treatments
have not adjusted future amounts upward to account for inflation.
Instead, current payoffs have been multiplied by T to reflect only
accrual of "real" (unadjusted for inflation) amounts. The average
interest rate on government securities includes an amount to cover
expected inflation, and thus might overestimate /.
    Second, the interest rate on government securities reflects a
guaranteed (risk-free) return. Because personnel programs will be
employed in all types of organizations from very risky endeavors to
 relatively risk-free endeavors, the discount rate (/) must reflect the
fact that risky firms must earn a risk premium and face a higher
discount rate than less risky firms.
   Operationally, then, the appropriate discount rate for utility
analysis should be the rate applied to uninflated benefits and costs
given the organization's evaluation of overall risk and return re-
quirements. With this definition in place, we can estimate an
illustrative range of discount rates.
   The low end of the range would equal the rate of interest on the
highest-quality (least risky) investment adjusted for inflation. Ehren-
berg and Smith (1982, p. 249) reported that the average real interest
rate (actual rate minus inflation) on the safest corporate bonds from
 1953 to 1977 was 2.14%. Thus, at a minimum. / would probably
equal about .02.
   The upper end of the range would equal the rate of retum used by
risky firms to evaluate capital budgeting decisions. Two surveys of
corporate practices provide some guidance. Gittman and Forrestal
(1977) found (p. 69) that firms' cost of capital ranged from roughly
5% to "above" 20%. These rates would apply to nominal (including
inflation) after-tax benefits and costs, so they must be adjusted
downward. Using a 1976-77 inflation rate of 6%, the corresponding
discount rates for real returns would be zero to above 13% (see
Bierman, 1981. p. 123 for the formula). A similar survey (Schall,"
Sundem. and Geijsbeek. 1978) found nominal rates of 7 to "greater
than 17" percent. Using an 8% inflation rate for 1977-1978, these
correspond to real rates from zero to greater than 8%. The authors
note that this sample was "biased toward large, stable firms." (p.
281) which may account for the lower values.
   As a rough range, then, values for / (in Equation 12) between 0%
and 15% will be used. Table 2 illustrates the effect of various
discount rates and tenure levels on the discount factor (DF) defined


--- PAGE BREAK ---

                                        JOHN W, BOUDREAU                                                    567

                                      TABLE 2
      Values of the Discount Factor (OF) At^ustment Computed Using Illustrative
       Combinations ofValttesfor the Di.scotmt Rate (i) and the Dttration of the
                                Prof;ram's Effects <Ti
                                                                 T
i                     1                    2                     5                    7                      10
.00                 1.00                 2.00                  5.00                  7.00                  10.00
.05                  .95                 1.86                  4.33                  5.79                   7.72
.10                  .91                 1.74                  3.79                  4.87                   6.M
,15                  .87                 1.62                  3.35                  4.16                   5.02
 Nuic—Table values are computed using the formula
            7
      DF-   2 [1/(1 + rt'l.




as



Table 3 shows the Table 2 values divided by T. Because Landy, et
al. (1982). Schmidt, et al. (1979, 1982), and Cascio and Silbey (1979)
essentially multiplied their one-year values by T, Table 3 shows the
adjustment needed to discount their values at various levels of 7 and
/. Tables 2 and 3 illustrate that the longer the duration of a personnel
program's effects (T) and the higher the discount rate (/). the larger
the effect of discounting. That is, the larger the reduction in
undiscounted utility gains [such as those reported by Landy, et al.
(1982), Schmidt, et al. (1979, 1982) and Cascio and Silbey, (1979)],
especially in later periods.

                                   TABLE 3
Values of the Discount Factor Adjustment {From Table 2} Divided hy the Duration
                          of the Program's Effects (T)
                                                                     T
 i                     1                    2                        5                  7                     10
.00                  1.00                  1.00                1.00                    1.00                  1.00
.05                   .95                   .93                 .87                       .83                 .11
.10                   .91                   .87                 .76                       .70                 .61
.15                   .87                   .81               " .67                       .59                 .50
    Note.—Table values are compuied using Ihe farmula
                f
      DFiT= 2 [1/(1 +iyi/r.

These ailiU5lmems would be applied lo uiilily estimates which multiplied one-year utility values by the duration of
the program's effecls ID,


--- PAGE BREAK ---

 568                  PERSONNEL PSYCHOLOGY

Empirical Illustrations: Combining the Effects of Variahle Costs,
Taxes, and Discounting

    Earlier, it was shown that the combined effects of variable costs
 and taxes could reduce the yearly SDy estimate for computer
 programmers reported by Schmidt, et al. (1982) from $10,413 to
 $5,415, producing a reduced total utility estimate. The effects of
 discounting can be illustrated by noting that Schmidt, et al. (1982)
 multiply their one-year payoff by T (equal to 2), the duration of the
 training program's effect. Table 2 indicates that the appropriate
 multiplication factor would be less than 2 if the discount rate is non-
 zero. For example, at a discount rate of 10% (i.e., / = .10), the
 appropriate multiplication factor would be 1.74, not 2. Table 3
 indicates that this is 87% of the multiplication factor used by
 Schmidt, et al. (1982). The result is that the yearly payoff from
 increased performance (after taxes and variable costs) of $5,415 is
 multiplied by 1.74 instead of 2. Subtracting after-tax treatment costs
 (which are not discounted in this case because they occur at time
 period zero, prior to any payoff) of $275 per person, the discounted,
 after-cost, after-tax utility estimate for the training program is
 $584,937. This equals 45% of the $1,303,690 value reported by
 Schmidt, et al. (1982).
    Unlike Schmidt, et al. (1982). the Cascio and Silbey (1979) study
 of selection utility accounted for instability in expected perform-
 ance. Assuming a correlation of .70 between performance in any
 pair of periods had the effect of multiplying the yearly SDy estimate
 by 4.36 (i.e., Vl9), rather than the value of 7(5 in this case). Though
 Cascio and Silbey did not discuss discounting, this instability
adjustment has the same effect as assuming a discount rate of 4.75%.
If the discount rate were higher, the appropriate multiplication
factor would be lower and vice versa. Given the earlier assumptions,
and using a discount rate of 10%, the resulting discounted after-cost,
after-tax utility estimate for replacing an interview with an assess-
ment center would be $41,154. This value equals 27% of the
$153,855 reported by Cascio and Silbey.
   The effects of discounting are even more pronounced than these
examples illustrate when the tenure of those selected or the duration
of treatment benefits is longer. Schmidt et a!. (1979) published an
empirical study of a sample with longer tenure. The average tenure
of computer programmers was 9.69 years. Schmidt, et al. accounted
for benefits accruing over time by multiplying their one-year esti-
mated payoffs by 9.69. For organizations facing a discount rate this
is unrealistic and inflates estimated utility. For example, when /


--- PAGE BREAK ---

                                      JOHN W. BOUDREAU                           569

equals .10, the values reported by Schmidt, et al. (1979. Table I)
would be reduced by about 40%. Specifically {using 7 = 10), the
range of undiscounted utility reported ($9,061 per selectee to
$157,282 per selectee) would correspond to a corrected (discounted)
utility range of $5,741 per selectee, [i.e.. {$9,061)(6.14/9.69)] to
$99,587 per selectee. (The latter figure refiects costs of $10 per
applicant when only the PAT is used).
   This range, however, still reflects the SDy value of $10,413, which
does not account for variable costs or taxes. While this may have
been appropriate for the federal government jobs used in Schmidt, et
al. (1979). it would not be appropriate for private-sector organiza-
tions facing variable costs and/or taxes. As noted earlier, assuming
variable costs of 5% and a tax rate of 45%. the after-cost, after-tax,
one-year SD,,^ value would be $5,415 li.e.. (.52)($10,413)]. Using
this yearly SD^f, value, and adjusting for the effects of discounting at
a rate of 10%, the range of utility values reported by Schmidt, et a!.
(1979, Table 1) would be from $2,985 [i.e.. ($9,06l)(6.14/9.69)(.52)l
to $51,779 per selectee. (The latter figure reflects after-tax costs of
$5.50 per applicant). These values are still substantial, but are only
33% of the reported values.

                                                Summary
   Individually, and in combination, the economic considerations
presented here indicate substantial biases (especially upward biases)
in published utility estimates when such estimates do not reflect the
effects of variable costs, taxes, and discounting. Table 4 summarizes
the magnitude of the adjustments implied by these considerations.


                                    TABLE 4
 Illustrative Adjustments to Correct Utility Estimates for the Combined Effects of
    Selected Levels of Variable Cav/.v f V). Taxe.i (TAX), and Discount Rates (i)
                                        Utility Model Parameter Level     Combined
    Adjustment                            V                TAX      /    Adjustment"
No Change                                 .00               ,00    ,00       1.00
Largest Upward                            .33               .00    .00       1.33
Moderate Downward                       -.15                .20    .05        .59
Largest Downward                        -.50                .55    .15        .16
  * Ttiese values are computed using the formula




The duration of program effects ,(T1 is assumed to be 5 periods.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

570                  PERSONNEL PSYCHOLOGY

   The last column of Table 4 contains the adjustment which would
be multiplied by the estimated sales value of increased job perform-
ance [i.e.. {N){T)(r,_,)(Z,){SDy) in Equation 1. or (N)iT)(d,)(SDy) in
Equation 2] from existing utility models. The adjustments in the last
column correspond to three levels of each variable. Previous utility
treatments have implied that V. TAX, and / all equal zero, as shown
in the first row of Table 4. The second row of Table 4 indicates the
set of assumptions producing the highest upward adjustment. Large
cost reductions are associated with sales value increases (V= + .33)
and the applicable taxes and discount rates are assumed to equal
zero. Adjusted utility estimates would equal 133% of previously
reported values. The third row of Table 4 depicts the results of
assuming a moderate and positively-variable cost proportion
(V=-. 15), a moderate tax rate (TAX = .20) and a moderate discount
rate {i^ .05). Under these assumptions, the adjusted utility estimates
would equal 59% of reported values. Finally, in the fourth row, all
parameters are set at levels which would lead to large downward
adjustments in utility values as typically reported. These adjustment
levels reduce pre-cost, pre-tax, undiscounted utility estimates to
16% of previously reported levels. If T were greater than five
periods [as in Schmidt, et al. (1979)1, the reductions would be still
greater.
   Across various situations, the actual levels of these variables will
differ. The values in Table 4 are provided to illustrate the substantial
range of the effects variable costs, taxes, and discounting can have
on personnel program utility. In view of the variability and magni-
tude of such effects. Equation 12 provides a more complete utility
formula than those previously used, (Equations 1 and 2): a formula
likely to produce less biased (though often lower) utility estimates
for personnel programs.

                 Implications for Future Research
   The three economic concepts discussed here indicate that existing
utility estimates can overstate actual economic utility whenever
positively-related variable costs, taxes, and/or discount rates affect
an organization's payoff function and decision making. The algebra-
ic formulas incorporating these factors are conceptually straightfor-
ward. In view of the magnitude of the possible effects of these
factors (especially in combination), the utility formulas presented
here provide a more complete definition of utility than previous
models. Euture research should incorporate these economic con-
cepts into utility analyses to avoid producing deficient and possibly
upwardly biased utility estimates.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

                        JOHN W. BOUDREAU                           571

   Estimates of the tax rate and discount rate are already frequently
used by organizations in evaluating other financial and economic
decisions, so it is likely that an organization's accountants or
financial experts can provide reasonably accurate estimates of these
parameters. The present utility model contributes to this process by
specifying the precise nature of these parameters. Eor example,
because utility analyses usually produce estimates of the real
(unadjusted for infiation) sales value of increased productivity over
time, utility analysts must adjust the traditional discount rates used
in financial analysis (which reflect inflation) downward. As noted
earlier, when inflation is high this adjustment substantially reduces
the nominal discount rate.
   Estimates of variable service eosts are probably less readily
available. Financial records are often not designed to separate costs
which vary with program-induced increases in productivity from
fixed costs. The present discussion has identified the service cost
concept more precisely than previous treatments, pointing out the
pitfalls of mistaking allocated fixed costs for variable costs and of
mistaking wages or salaries for sales value. Thus, data on service
costs may now be gathered more systematically. Further research is
needed which explores ways to estimate service costs within this
conceptual definition.
   The present utility model provides a more precise definition of
economic utility considerations which can facilitate the "closer
liason between personnel psychologists and cost accountants"
proposed by Cascio and Silbey (1979, p. 116). Landy, et al. (1982)
suggest that validity may be indicated by positive correlations
between cost accounting procedures and direct utility estimation
procedures. Cost accounting utility estimates will (and should)
incorporate the economic concepts discussed here. Recognizing
these concepts in direct utility estimates provides a much stronger
test of the convergence between the two procedures (both in terms
of shape, indicated by correlations, and in terms of level). In
addition by making such economic considerations explicit, incon-
sistencies may be more thoroughly explained and addressed.
    Incorporating these economic variables into utility estimates will
 require research addressing the nature of the economic variables
themselves. Landy, et al. (1982) suggest a need for descriptive
 research elaborating the contextual or boundary conditions affecting
 utility. This research would examine the behavior of SDy across job
families and job titles. Such research can provide information on
 inter- and intraorganizational SDy variation. It is critical that such
 research recognize and include the economic concepts discussed
 here. Not only are jobs, job families, companies, and industries


--- PAGE BREAK ---

572                   PERSONNEL PSYCHOLOGY

  likely to differ in SD, based on sales value or revenue (as measured
  by previous authors), but the proportion of variable costs, effective
 tax levels, and discount rates are also likely to vary. In fact, it is
  possible that a great deal of interorganizational variability in utility
  within job families may be due to such economic variables. Includ-
 ing such variables in future utility analyses is likely to increase the
 ability to predict, explain, and more precisely generalize the utility
 implications of personnel programs.
     Apart from assessing the behavior of the economic parameters
 themselves, future research incorporating these concepts may help
 to explain inconsistencies in SDy estimates produced by existing
 "rational" estimation methods. Two very different concepts have
 been used to define the underlying dollar scale in previous SDy
 estimates. Schmidt, et al. (1979) asked supervisors to estimate the
 ''value of output" (p. 621)of computer programmers, and instructed
 them to "consider what the cost would be of having an outside firm
 provide these products and services" (emphasis added). Cascio and
 Silbey (1979), as noted earlier, asked third-level sales managers to
 estimate the yearly "dollar value of sales to the company" produced
 by second-level sales managers (p. 110, emphasis added).
     One recent study (Bobko and Karren. 1982) compared both
approaches by having 13 supervisors estimate the "total yearly
dollar sales" produced by insurance counsellors in one year, and
then having the supervisors make another estimate considering what
 it would cost to have an outside firm provide the products and
services. Bobko and Karren's results indicate that the average
supervisory estimate of the standard deviation of "sales revenue"
was not significantly different from the actual standard deviation of
sales revenue. The within-sample standard deviations of these
estimates however, were roughly as large as the averages, indicating
inconsistencies in the SD, estimates. When estimates of the cost of
obtaining services from an outside firm were gathered, the averages
were much smaller and the within-sample standard deviations of the
estimates were larger than the averages, again indicating inconsis-
tency within the sample. Bobko and Karren note that the "substan-
tial variation [in SDy estimates] suggests a need for research to
explain differences among supervisors in these cognitive estimates"
(p. 275).
    The economic considerations presented here provide a framework
for systematically conducting such research and for explaining such
results more thoroughly. For example, these considerations indicate
that the "concrete standard" suggested by Schmidt, et a!. (1979)
may be inappropriate or confusing in an economic sense. The value


--- PAGE BREAK ---

                        JOHN W. BOUDREAU                         573

of products and services "as sold" is not equal to the cost of
obtaining them from outside contractors. A rational economic
organization would pay an outside firm a maximum of the costs to
provide the services in-house, not their sales value. Paying more
would not be rational because at higher contractor prices the firm or
manager would rather provide the services themselves and save the
cost difference.
   By using both the "overall value o f and the "costs of obtaining"
goods and services as standards in the same measure, the Schmidt,
et al. (1979) estimation procedure may introduce confusion and
resulting unreliability into SDy estimates. Moreover, to interpret
estimates based on this "standard" as reflecting the value of
products and services "as sold" (Hunter and Schmidt. 1982b) may
be highly speculative.
   This observation is not intended to discount the genuine opera-
tional advantages of "rational" SDy estimates or the contributions
of those who have applied them. It does illustrate, however, that the
economic concepts embodied in the present utility model provide a
framework for investigating how such "rational" estimates are
made, what phenomena they reflect, and how to improve future
operational SDy estimation procedures.
   An important research direction not addressed previously but
implied by the present discussion involves the temporal stability of
utility parameters. All previous treatments have assumed r,,, and
SDy are constant over time within the treated (e.g., selected) group.
The present utility discussion has also added the assumption that
variable costs and taxes remain constant. As shown in Equation 11,
however, these assumptions are not necessary to utility analysis.
They are made for convenience and may obscure important phe-
nomena. For example, the most recently proposed selection utility
estimation procedures (Cascio and Silbey. 1979; Cascio. 1982;
Schmidt, etaL, 1979; Janz and Dunnette, 1977) estimate 5D,,. for the
existing incumbent population and then assume this value applies to
the .selected firoup throughout its tenure. Schmidt, et al. (1979) and
Hunter and Schmidt (1982b) note that such estimates may underesti-
mate SD,,. in the applicant population due to'range restriction.
However, such estimates also fail to recognize that the analytically
correct SD^,. value comprises a sum of single-period values reflect-
ing the tenure of the cohort and might change with increasing tenure
(see Equation 11). Thus SD^,^ (in period I) should reflect variability
in service value among applicants who begin with no work experi-
ence. In period 2, 5D,n, should reflect variability in service value
among applicants who begin with one year's experience, and so on.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

574                      PERSONNEL PSYCHOLOGY

No existing research has addressed this eflfect, so its magnitude
remains an empirical question.

                                    Conclusion
   In their recent Personnel Psychology article. Schmidt, et al.
(1982) suggest that their reported utility estimates may be "greater
than has generally been assumed" (p. 345). If so. one explanation
may be that such utility estimates overlook economic considerations
which affect organizational investment planning and decision mak-
ing. This is especially true when these considerations indicate
substantial reductions in reported utility estimates, as demonstrated
here. This discussion has shown that utility estimates recognizing
such economic considerations reflect a substantially different, more
realistic, and more complete description of the effect of personnel
programs. In view of the economic nature of most organizations,
utility estimates incorporating these economic concepts are likely to
better reflect the "bottom line"" (Landy, et al.. 1982} contribution of
personnel programs.
   By incorporating economic adjustments into the Brogden-Cron-
bach-Gleser selection utility model [as well as the more recent
Schmidt, et ai. (1982) version of this model extending it to other
personnel programs], the present utility model provides a utility
deflnition arguably more consistent with the economic nature of
most organizations, and more compatible with typical investment
analyses. The dollar-valued effects of personnel programs often
remain substantial even after accounting for variable costs, taxes,
and discounting. This is apparent in the illustrations presented.
Thus, in addition to extending the theoretical deflnition of utility and
suggesting new research directions, the present model may provide
a more defensible and realistic utility deflnition. This utility defini-
tion can often lead to lower utility estimates, but when such
estimates remain substantial, they provide more compelling evi-
dence for the utility to be derived from personnel programs.

                     •           REFERENCES
Belcher. D. W. Compensation administration. Englewood Cliffs. NJ: Prentice-Hall,
  Inc.. 1974.
Biermati, H, J. Financial management and ii\fiation. New York: The Free Press,
  1981,
Bierman. H. J. and Smidt. S. The capital budgeting decision (3rd ed.). New York:
  MacMillan, 1971,
Bobko, P, and Karren. R. The estimation of standard deviations in utility analysis. In
  K. H. Chung (Ed.) Proceeding.s of the forty-second annual meeting of the


--- PAGE BREAK ---

                              JOHN W. BOUDREAU                                  575

  Academy of Management. New York: Academy of Management. 1982, 272-276.
Boudreau. J. W. and Berger. C, J. Toward a conceptual model of employee
  movement utility. In K. M. Rowland and G. R. Ferris (Eds.), Research in
  personnel and human resource management, in press.
Brealey. R. A. and Myers, S. C. Principles of corporate finance. New York:
  McGraw-Hill. 1981.
Brogden. H. E. On the interpretation of the correlation coefficient as a measure of
  predictive efficiency. Jmtrnul of Edttcalional Psychology, 1946. Xl, 64-76.
Brogden. H. E. When testing pays off. PERSONNEL PSYCHOLOGY. 1949. 2. 171-185.
Brogden. H. E. and Taylor. E. K. The dollar criterion—applying the cost accounting
  concept lo criterion construction. PERSONNEL PSYCHOLOGV. 1950. 3. 133-154.
Cascio. W. E. Responding to ihe demand for accountability: A critical analysis of
  three utility models, Organizational Behavior and Human Performance, 25. 1980,
  32-45.
Cascio, W, F. Costing human resources: The financial impact of behavior in
  organizations. Boston. MA: Kent, 1982.
Cascio, W. F. and Silbey, V. Utility of the assessment center as a selection device.
  Jotirna! of Applied Psychology, 1979,64, 107-118.
Copeland. R. M. and Dasher, P. E. Managerial accounting. Santa Barbara, CA:
  Hamilton Publishing Co.. 1974.
Cronbach, L. J. and Gleser. G. Psychological tests and personnel decisions, Urbana.
  IL; University of Illinois Press, 1965.
Doppelt. J. E. and Bennett, G. K. Reducing the cost of training satisfactory workers
  by using tests. PERSONNEL PSYCHOLOGY, 1953, 6, 1-8.
Ehrenberg. R. and Smith. R. Modern labor economics. Glenview. Illinois: Scotl,
  Foresman and Co.. 1982.
Gittman. L. T. and Forrestal. J. R., Jr. Capita! budgeting techniques used by major
  firms. Financial Management, Fall, 1977, 6, 66-71.
Gordon. M. E. and Johnson. W. A. Seniority: A review of its legal and scientific
  standing. PERSONNEL PSYCHOLOGY. 1982. 35. 255-280.
Horngren, C. T. Introduction to management accounting. Englewood-Cliffs. NJ:
  Prentice-Hall, 1981.
Hunter, J. E. and Schmidt, F. L. Ability tests: Economic benefits versus the issue of
  fairness. Industrial Relations, 1982. 21. 293-308. (al
Hunter, J. E. and Schmidt. F. L. Fitting people to jobs: The impact of personnel
  selection on national productivity. In M. D. Dunnette and E. A. Fleishman (Eds.),
  Human performance and prodtictivity (Volume I). Hillsdale, NJ: Eribaum Asso-
  ciates. 1982. (b)
Janz, J. T. and Dunnetle. M. An approach to selection decisions; Dollars and sense.
  In Hackman. J. R., Lawler, E., & Porter. L. W. (Eds.), Perspectives on behavior
  in organizations. New York: McGraw-Hill, 1977.
Landy, F. J., Farr, J. L., and Jacobs. R. R. Utility concepts in performance
  measurement. Organizational Behavior and Htnnan Performance. 1982. 30. 15-40.
Lee. R. and Booth, J. M. A utility analysis of a weighted application blank designed
  to predict turnover for clerical employees. Journal of Applied Psychology, 1974,
  59,516-518.
Ogan, P. A human resource value model for professional service organizations. The
  Accotmting Review, 1976. 51, 306-320.
Roche, U. J. The Cronbach-Gleser utility function in fixed treatment employee
  selection (Doctoral dissertation. Southern Illinois University. I%1). Dissertation
  Abstracts International, 1961-62, 22, 4413. (University Microfilms No. 62-1570).


--- PAGE BREAK ---

576                      PERSONNEL PSYCHOLOGY

Schall. L. D.. Sundem. G. L.. and Geijsbeek. W. R.. Jr. Survey and analysis of
  capital budgeting methods. Journal of Finance. 1978. 33. 281-287.
Schmidt. F. L. and Hoffman, B. Empirical comparison of three methods of assessing
  utility of a selection device. Journal of Industrial and Organizational Psychology.
   1973. 1973, 13-22.
Schmidt, F. L., Hunter, J. E.. and Pearlman. K. Assessing the economic impact of
  personnel programs on work-force productivity. PERSONNEL PSYCHOLOGY, 1982,
  35. 333-347,
Schmidt, F. L., Hunter, J, E,, McKenzie, R. C . and Muldrow. T. W, Impact of valid
  selection procedures on work-force productivity. Journal of Applied Psychology.,
   1979. 64, 609-626.
Tiffin, J. Industrial psychology. New York: Prentice-Hall, 1942.
Tiffin, J. and McCormick. E. J. Industrial psychology. (4th ed.), Englewood, Cliffs,
   NJ: Prentice-Hall, 19S8.
U.S. master tax gtiide. 1982. Chicago. IL: Commerce Clearing House. 1981.
Van Naersson. R, F. Selecrie van chauffers. Groningen: Wolters. 1963, ln L, J.
  Cronbach and G. C. Gieser, Psychological tests and personnel decisions (2nd ed.l.
   Urbana: University of Illinois Press, 1965.
Weston. J. F. and Brigham. E. F. Managerial finance (6lh ed.) Hinsdale, IL: Dryden
   Press. 1978.


--- PAGE BREAK ---


