See discussions, stats, and author profiles for this publication at: https://www.researchgate.net/publication/342315188



Utility analysis of character assessment in employee placement

Article in Leadership & Organization Development Journal · June 2020
DOI: 10.1108/LODJ-07-2019-0314




CITATIONS                                                                                              READS

12                                                                                                     892


3 authors, including:

            Gerard Seijts                                                                                         Jose Antonio Espinoza
            Western University                                                                                    University of Winnipeg
            87 PUBLICATIONS 4,965 CITATIONS                                                                       19 PUBLICATIONS 144 CITATIONS

                SEE PROFILE                                                                                          SEE PROFILE




 All content following this page was uploaded by Gerard Seijts on 07 October 2020.

 The user has requested enhancement of the downloaded file.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

                          The current issue and full text archive of this journal is available on Emerald Insight at:
                          https://www.emerald.com/insight/0143-7739.htm




   Utility analysis of character     Character
                                 assessment in
assessment in employee placement placement
                                     employee
                                               Gerard Seijts
                 Ivey Business School, Western University, London, Canada
                                                                                                                                             703
                                           Jose A. Espinoza
         Department of Psychology, Western University, London, Canada, and                                                 Received 13 July 2019
                                              Julie Carswell                                                              Revised 2 January 2020
                                                                                                                          Accepted 15 April 2020
                       Sigma Assessment Systems Inc., London, Canada

Abstract
Purpose – There has been a surge of interest in leader character and a push to bring character into mainstream
management theory and practice. Research has shown that CEOs and board members have many questions
about the construct of leader character. For example, they like to see hard data indicating to what extent
character contributes to organizational performance. Human resource management professionals are often
confronted with the need to discuss and demonstrate the value of training and development initiatives. The
question as to whether such interventions have a dollars-and-cents return on the investment is an important
one to consider for any organizational decision-maker, especially given the demand for increased
accountability, the push for transparency and tightening budgets in organizations. The authors
investigated the potential dollar impact associated with the placement of managers based on the
assessment of leader character, and they used utility analysis to estimate the dollar value associated with
the use of one instrument – the Leader Character Insight Assessment or LCIA – to measure leader character.
Design/methodology/approach – The authors used field data collected for purposes of succession planning
in a large Canadian manufacturing organization. The focus was on identifying senior management candidates
suitable for placement into the most senior levels of leadership in the organization. Peers completed the LCIA to
obtain leader character ratings of the candidates. The LCIA is a behaviorally based and validated instrument to
assess leader character. Performance assessments of the candidates were obtained through supervisor ratings.
Findings – The correlation between the leader character measure provided by peers and performance
assessed by the supervisor was 0.30 (p < 0.01). Using the data required to calculate ΔU from the Brogden-
Cronbach-Gleser model leads to an estimate of CAD $564,128 for the use of the LCIA over the expected tenure of
15 years, which is equivalent to CAD $37,609 yearly; and CAD $375,285 over an expected tenure of 10 years,
which is equivalent to CAD $37,529 yearly. The results of the study also indicate that there is still a positive and
sizeable return on investment or ROI associated with the LCIA in employee placement even with highly
conservative adjustments to the basic utility analysis formula.
Originality/value – Utility analysis is a quantitative and robust method of evaluating human resource
programs. The authors provide an illustration of the potential utility of the LCIA in a selection process for
senior managers. They assert that selecting and promoting managers on leader character and developing their
character-based leadership will not only leverage their own contributions to the organization but also
contribute to a trickle-down effect on employees below them.
Keywords Leadership, Character, Utility analysis, Leader character insight assessment
Paper type Research paper


Introduction
Hannah and Avolio (2011) stated that “character is an indispensable component of
sustainable leadership performance” (p. 979). Liborius (2017) found that character –
specifically, integrity and humility – incrementally predicted the leader’s worthiness of
being followed above and beyond the impact of transformational leadership. Yet, according
to Hannah and Avolio (2011), “most current leadership theories such as leader member                                        Leadership & Organization
                                                                                                                                  Development Journal
                                                                                                                                    Vol. 41 No. 5, 2020
                                                                                                                                           pp. 703-720
We are grateful to the Ian O. Ihnatowycz Institute for Leadership at the Ivey Business School for the                    © Emerald Publishing Limited
                                                                                                                                             0143-7739
funding that has supported much of the research on leader character.                                                    DOI 10.1108/LODJ-07-2019-0314


--- PAGE BREAK ---

LODJ   exchange or ethical leadership do not include an in-depth discussion of character or other
41,5   locus that drives such leadership” (p. 980). Scholars have urged leadership researchers to
       address this void and pursue an agenda that helps us to develop a deeper understanding of
       character in business leadership (e.g. Cohen et al., 2014; Wright and Quick, 2011).
           A surge of interest in leader character in the public, private and not-for-profit sectors has
       created an additional push to bring character into mainstream management theory and
       practice. We suspect that the recent interest in leader character is, to some degree, the result of
704    highly visible leadership fiascos. For example, the business world continues to be mired in
       scandal, from the role of bank executives in the global financial crisis, to Volkswagen’s diesel
       emissions scandal, to the fraud at Theranos, to Wells Fargo’s unauthorized account openings,
       and to cultures of harassment in many organizations. These examples all involve leaders with
       character deficiencies that induce, influence or propel poor judgment and / or situations where
       others have accepted and tolerated such behavior when shown by others (e.g. Crossan et al.,
       2017; Seijts et al., 2019; Wright, 2011).
           The cost of these (and other) transgressions for organizations and related stakeholders
       has been substantial. For example, in 2016 alone, in two settlements, one with the United
       States and the State of California and the other with the US Federal Trade Commission,
       German automaker Volkswagen AG and related entities agreed to spend up to USD $14.7
       billion to settle allegations of cheating emissions tests and deceiving customers (Good Jobs
       First, 2016). It is no surprise, therefore, that scholars have urged that character be elevated
       alongside competencies in leadership research and practice (e.g. Hannah and Avolio, 2011;
       Seijts et al., 2015; Sturm et al., 2017; Wright and Quick, 2011).
           Leader character is an ambiguous construct that has challenged researchers (e.g. Crossan
       et al., 2017; Wright and Goodstein, 2007; Wright and Huang, 2008). For example, researchers
       have used different definitions and operationalizations of character. Although a detailed
       discussion of what exactly constitutes leader character is beyond the scope of this article, a
       comprehensive examination of the literature reveals that many researchers anchor their
       discussion of character in virtuous character (e.g. Bright et al., 2006; Crossan et al., 2017;
       Liborius, 2017; Palanski et al., 2015; Riggio et al., 2010; Peterson and Seligman, 2004; Wang
       and Hackett, 2016; Wright et al., 2017). For example, Crossan and her colleagues (2017)
       describe character as a set of interconnected virtues that are manifested “in habits of
       cognition, emotion and behavior that embody human excellence and produce social
       betterment” (p. 2). They conceptualize leader character as an amalgam of virtues, values and
       personality traits that enable sustained excellence through habits and / or behaviors.
           Virtues are contextually appropriate behaviors (e.g. humanity and temperance) that are
       widely considered as emblematic of good leadership. For example, demonstrating care for
       others and actively promoting their well-being are behaviors associated with the virtue of
       humanity and contribute to both personal and professional development. A few of the
       virtuous behaviors reflect personality traits, such as conscientiousness and openness to
       experience, which are relatively stable dispositional variables. These personality traits
       predispose individuals to behave in certain virtuous ways, if not overridden by contextual
       variables such as incentive systems or peer pressure. For example, behaviors that help to
       withstand difficult situations and to bounce back from hardship reflect the personality trait of
       resiliency, which enables individuals to develop mechanisms for protection against
       experiences that could be overwhelming, if not debilitating. Lastly, a few of the virtuous
       behaviors express values, such as transparency and acting with candor in interpersonal
       interactions. Values are an acquired set of deeply held beliefs about what is morally right or
       wrong and, like personality traits, remain relatively stable across contexts and situations (e.g.
       Russell, 2001; Schwartz and Bilsky, 1987). For example, leaders who provide timely and
       candid feedback to their employees tend to develop higher levels of trust which facilitates


--- PAGE BREAK ---

engagement and sustained excellence. Character, in short, is a habit of being – a set of              Character
observable behaviors – anchored in a set of virtues, personality traits and values.               assessment in
    Crossan, Gandz, Seijts and their colleagues initiated a comprehensive research program to
examine character in organizational and managerial contexts (e.g. Crossan et al., 2016, 2017;
                                                                                                      employee
Seijts et al., 2015, 2019) and, in doing so, they extended the seminal work of Peterson and          placement
Seligman (2004) on virtues and character strengths to organizational settings. Both
qualitative and quantitative studies involving over 2,500 leaders from the public, private and
not-for-profit sectors led to the identification of 11 character dimensions and 61 character                  705
elements (see Figure 1). Crossan et al. (2017) use the term character dimension to refer to the
higher-order construct (e.g. temperance, humanity and courage) and character elements to
refer to the virtuous behavioral indicators (e.g. composed, compassionate and tenacious) that
illustrate and support the dimensions.
    Further, as can be seen from Figure 1, the researchers view character as a network of
closely intertwined character dimensions that support each other. This intertwined aspect is
an important property of the framework since what might appear to be inherently a virtue
may, in fact, operate as a vice when not connected to other leader character dimensions. For




                                                                                                           Figure 1.
                                                                                                     Leader character
                                                                                                      dimensions and
      Note(s): Leader character framework reflecting character dimensions and                     associated elements
      associated elements. Framework adapted from Crossan et al. (2017)


--- PAGE BREAK ---

LODJ   example, an excess of confidence and determination may be interpreted as insensitivity or
41,5   arrogance in the absence of empathy and compassion.
           The research that Crossan, Gandz, Seijts and others conducted led to the development of a
       character diagnostic — the Leader Character Insight Assessment (LCIA; Crossan et al., 2014)
       — structured in both self-administered and 360-degree formats. The LCIA consists of 60-plus
       behavioral statements used to describe the character elements. Latham and Wexley (1994)
       explained that behavioral statements are the preferred method of performance assessment
706    for at least two reasons. First, behavioral statements measure what people actually do on the
       job, and hence they are less susceptible to biases outside the control of the person being
       evaluated. Second, behavioral statements typically show higher inter-rater reliability than
       pure trait-based measures. However, consistent with the definition of character provided
       earlier, several of the behavioral statements embed within them cognitive and / or emotional
       components. For example, the character dimension of humanity invokes empathy and
       compassion which contain emotional aspects.
           The instrument has been used by manufacturing and construction companies, institutions
       in the financial sector, organizations providing healthcare services, government agencies,
       academic institutions and other entities. The diagnostic tool provides an assessment of an
       individual’s leader character and is a resource to help them unpack and discuss the
       dimensions and elements of character.
           Although research has shown that character is related to performance measures
       including, but not limited to, executive performance, innovation, subjective well-being and
       customer retention, Seijts and his colleagues (2019) reported that CEOs and board members
       have many questions about the construct of character. Senior executives in the public, private
       and not-for-profit sectors believe character is essential in individual, team and organizational
       excellence. However, they like to see data showing to what extent character contributes
       financially to organizational performance. Put differently, they are concerned about the
       question as to the utility of selecting leaders based on their level of character: How much
       exactly does leader character matter? Human resource management professionals are often
       confronted with the need to discuss and demonstrate the value of their training and
       development initiatives, including making a compelling case to use organizational resources
       to select on and develop leader character (e.g. Cascio and Boudreau, 2008; Winkler et al., 2010).
       Our assumption is that empirical evidence on the relationship between character and
       financial metrics would reinforce the perceived importance of character and hence makes it
       easier for human resource professionals and senior executives to justify embedding character
       in organizational processes.
           Studies have shown that human resource management processes and interventions – in
       recruitment and selection, performance appraisal, training and development, turnover and so
       forth – can have a substantial economic impact on business organizations (e.g. Cascio, 1999).
       Our paper relies on the previously established finding that character drives performance to
       tackle a more practical concern – to investigate the potential financial impact associated with
       placing managers based on leader character. Specifically, we used utility analysis to estimate
       the dollar value of employee placement based on the assessment of character using the LCIA.
           Utility analysis is a quantitative method of evaluating the net financial benefit resulting
       from human resource interventions such as selection and training and development (e.g. Cascio,
       1999; Holling, 1998; Sturman, 2012). An organization’s success depends, to a large extent, on
       having the right work force. For example, Tziner and Birati (2015) wrote that: “[t]he economic
       success of a firm is contingent on careful planning, not only in the realms of production and
       marketing, but also in the selection, maintenance, and training of a highly loyal and skilled
       work force whose size and performance ratings are compatible with the firm’s short- and long-
       term financial strategies” (p. 1270). Therefore, it is important that organizations appreciate and
       use quantitative approaches to selecting, developing and motivating their employees.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

Utility analysis overview                                                                               Character
In the context of employee selection or placement, utility refers to the improvement in the         assessment in
“quality of individuals selected beyond what would have occurred had that device not been
used” (Cascio and Aguinis, 2011, p. 333). What exactly constitutes the “improvement in
                                                                                                        employee
quality” is the chief distinction between the various utility analysis models. Some models             placement
designate this improvement as a binary decision on the successfulness of the candidate
selected with the device (Taylor and Russell, 1939), whereas others designate it as the average
improvement on a criterion or performance metric for the group selected with the device                     707
versus a group selected at random (Naylor and Shine, 1965).
    The model that is at the core of the utility analysis approach we used in our study –
Brogden (1946) and Cronbach and Gleser (1965) – defines utility as the estimated
improvement in financial value due to increased performance from candidates selected
with a device versus the performance of individuals selected at random. Therefore, in the
context of the LCIA, the dollar-value improvement in performance stems from the placement
of individuals in a management position using the device.

The Brogden-Cronbach-Gleser model
The Brogden-Cronbach-Gleser model assumes a linear relationship between the scores on the
selection device (e.g. the LCIA) and the criterion. Importantly, the criterion must be an
operationalization of job performance (e.g. peer or supervisor ratings of performance) to satisfy
the assumptions underlying the utility analysis. Both the predictor variable and the criterion
must be continuous and are assumed to closely resemble or be identical in distribution forms
(e.g. Cascio and Aguinis, 2011; O’Boyle and Aguinis, 2012; Schmidt et al., 1979).
    With these assumptions, the model uses the correlation between the scores on the selection
device and criterion as an index of how an increase in the scores on the selection device
corresponds to an increase in the criterion and, subsequently, job performance. Although
similar to the Naylor-Shine model (1965), the Brogden-Cronbach-Gleser model includes an
estimate of the dollar-value improvement provided by an individual who performs one
standard deviation above the average on the criterion (SDy). The model also includes the cost
of using the device and the dollar-value improvement compounded over an employee’s
tenure. The utility formula can be expressed as follows (see Cascio, 1999):
                          ΔU ¼ N3Tðrxy 3Zxs 3SDy Þ  ½NðC÷SRÞ

where,
   ΔU 5 Marginal utility or the estimated dollar-value savings over tenure as a result of
   using the selection device in placement
   N 5 Number of candidates placed into a position per year
   T 5 Average tenure in years of employees in a position
   rxy 5 Correlation between the selection device or predictor and the criterion or job
   performance measure in the employee population
   Zxs 5 Average performance of selected candidates in standardized units
   SDy 5 Dollar value of a standard deviation in the criterion
   C 5 The cost incurred in acquiring and administering the selection device per candidate
   SR 5 Selection ratio or the number of candidates placed into a position per year, divided
   by the number of candidates available per instance of placement


--- PAGE BREAK ---

LODJ   Estimating SDy
41,5   The greatest difficulty in calculating utility in terms of dollar value is the estimation of SDy.
       SDy reflects the dollar value to the organization of obtaining applicants whose average
       performance is one standard deviation higher than other applicants. The estimate of SDy is an
       important consideration because it affects confidence in the conclusions regarding the
       economic impact of selecting an employee based on leader character (see, for example, Becker
       and Huselid, 1992; Boudreau, 1991).
708        For positions that include objective markers of performance (e.g. car or mortgage sales), the
       estimation of SDy only requires that the criterion data for employees in this position be plotted
       to determine the dollar value associated with the standard deviation. SDy is simply the standard
       deviation of the job performance criterion. However, such objective data are not available for
       many positions (e.g. leadership roles that oversee idea generation and implementation), and,
       instead, researchers and practitioners have relied on supervisors to provide judgments of the
       estimated monetary value provided by employees — based on the quantity and quality of the
       outputs — who perform at various percentiles to calculate SDy (e.g. Cascio and Aguinis, 2011;
       Schmidt et al., 1979). Nonetheless, estimation of SDy using judgments from supervisors can be
       time-consuming and expensive. In light of the aforementioned, Schmidt and Hunter (1983)
       suggested that 40% of the average salary for the position can be used as an estimate of SDy
       because most supervisor-based estimates of SDy fluctuate between 40% and 70% of average
       salary (see also Becker and Huselid, 1992; Holling, 1998).
           Other researchers have found that 40% of the average salary might be a very conservative
       estimate of SDy (e.g. Judiesch et al., 1992). Further, Hunter et al. (1990) found that these
       percentage-based estimates fluctuate based on the cognitive complexity required to
       effectively perform the job, with jobs characterized by the highest levels of cognitive
       complexity resulting in estimates of SDy above 70% of the average salary. The 70% estimate
       may be the most appropriate value to use in our calculations since the jobs we studied were at
       the senior management level (e.g. directors, vice-presidents and senior vice-presidents).

       Concerns with estimates of the basic utility analysis formula
       Previous research has found that the results of utility analysis are not always readily
       accepted by managers and practitioners for deciding whether to implement a new instrument
       or tool (e.g. Latham and Whyte, 1994; Whyte and Latham, 1997). Several researchers (e.g.
       Cascio and Boudreau, 2008; Macan and Highhouse, 1994; Sturman, 2012) have argued that
       this might be due to the tendency for the basic utility analysis formula to provide exceedingly
       high estimates of returns that might be perceived as unrealistic. However, various
       adjustments to improve the precision of utility estimates have been developed (see, for
       example, Sturman, 2000, for a review). Generally, these adjustments consist of modifications
       to the different components of the basic utility analysis formula. Therefore, in order to present
       a more comprehensive assessment of the potential returns by implementing a character
       assessment into placement practices, our analyses include several of these adjustments,
       resulting in a range of utility estimates. The nature of the adjustments is explained in detail in
       the Supplemental Analyses section.

       Methods
       Sample and data
       We used data collected for purposes of succession planning in a large Canadian
       manufacturing organization that operates on an international stage. The third author was
       asked to help the organization build an infrastructure to identify candidates suitable for
       placement into the most senior levels of leadership in the organization. The infrastructure
       should cultivate a pool of candidates for senior leadership positions and facilitate informed as
       opposed to ad hoc placement decisions. Given the importance of the initiative for the


--- PAGE BREAK ---

organization’s succession and development planning, there was a 100% response rate. The                 Character
total number of candidates or targets was 111. The number of males and females was 79 and           assessment in
32, respectively. No other demographic data were collected from the candidates at the request
of the organization.
                                                                                                        employee
    Peers completed the LCIA to obtain leader character ratings of the candidates. The                 placement
average number of peer assessments available for each senior manager was 4.22 (SD 5 1.67).
Peer assessments were used because they are frequently used as a tool to facilitate employee
development (e.g. Campion et al., 2015; McCauley and Moxley, 1996; Toegel and Conger,                       709
2003). Performance assessments of the candidates were obtained through supervisor ratings.
The average number of performance assessments for each manager was 2.17 (SD 5 1.39).
Measures were collected at roughly the same time, and hence the research design was
concurrent in nature. Although, traditionally, predictive validity studies have been assumed
to be superior to concurrent validity studies, Barrett et al. (1981) showed that the differences
associated with these designs have a minimal impact on the magnitude of the obtained
validity coefficients.
    N and T are relatively straightforward: they are based on historical data and, of course,
determined by organizational needs, turnover and other variables. For example, one
placement every two years would be entered as 0.5. N and T were provided by the
organization and were set at 1 and 15 years, respectively. However, due to a concern with the
potential overestimation of tenure provided to us, analyses were also conducted that included
an expected tenure of 10 years.
    SR requires an estimate of the average number of candidates for the position and is based
on organizational records. This variable too was provided by the organization and was set
at 3.
    C requires an estimate of the costs associated with administering the LCIA to a single
candidate. There is a standard fee associated with administering the LCIA; however,
additional costs may include the costs associated with the time expended on obtaining the
completed LCIA. The direct costs associated with the peer review of the senior manager were
set at CAD $800 given the average of four raters. The average annual pay for the position is
based on organizational records and is necessary to calculate SDy. The average starting
salary for the position was CAD $165,000.
    Zxs is the average performance of selected candidates in standardized units. The estimate
of Zxs was taken from Naylor and Shine’s (1965) tables to calculate Zxs using the selection ratio
of 0.33 given to us by the company.

Measures
Leader character. We used the LCIA developed and validated by Crossan and her colleagues
(e.g. Crossan et al., 2017; Crossan et al., 2014) to measure leader character. The assessment
asked peers to rate the senior managers in terms of their likelihood to demonstrate 61 leader-
specific behaviors. These behaviors are classified into 11 character dimensions:
transcendence, drive, collaboration, humanity, humility, integrity, temperance, justice,
accountability, courage and judgement. A sample leader-specific behavior for rating is:
“Displays resolve and stays committed to see things through.”
    The scale scores ranged from 1 (extremely unlikely) to 5 (extremely likely); the midpoint
was 3 (unsure). The average score of the 61 items was used as the character measure in our
analysis. The average score was used for a single reason. Utility analysis is a distinctly
practical tool and is concerned with whether using a certain assessment instrument such as
the LCIA has the potential to improve the value of the selection and employee development
process. Prior theorizing and research have shown that organizations should consider the 11
leader character dimensions in a holistic way rather than focusing on only a select few of the
dimensions (e.g. Crossan et al., 2017). Further, we could think of no compelling reason why


--- PAGE BREAK ---

LODJ   organizations would only use one or a subset of the character dimensions in making
41,5   placement decisions. The Cronbach’s alpha was 0.95 (see Table 1). Furthermore, to confirm
       the appropriateness of aggregating our rater scores, we examined the intraclass correlation
       coefficient (ICC[1]). The ICC[1] value was 0.13 and well above the 0.05 guideline (e.g. LeBreton
       and Senter, 2008; Reise et al., 2005), indicating non-ignorable sharedness and hence justifying
       the aggregation of rater scores.
          Job performance. The direct supervisors were asked to rate the performance of the senior
710    managers using an eight-item measure of job performance. Assessments were administered
       before placement as part of an annual succession planning process. The measure was
       developed in collaboration with human resource and leadership development executives
       from the organization as it was critical to use items that were relevant to the organization, and
       the most senior leadership positions, on a go-forward basis. Direct supervisors were asked to
       rate managers on each of the eight items, scoring the manager based on performance in their
       current position as well as aspects of performance that were considered important to
       promotion and job performance overall. A sample item is: “How effective would this person be
       as a leader of a structured cross-functional team?” The scale scores ranged from 1 (low) to 7
       (high). The average score of the eight items was used as the job performance measure in our
       analysis. The Cronbach’s alpha was 0.91 (see Table 1). The ICC[1] value was 0.39.


       Results
       The means and standard deviations of the variables measured, as well as the correlations
       among these variables, are shown in Table 1. The correlation between the leader character
       measure provided by peers and performance assessed by the supervisor was 0.30 (p < 0.01).
           As explained in the introduction, the estimate of SDy is challenging for jobs that do not
       have objective markers of performance. We used 70% of salary as a proxy of SDy. Therefore,
       using the data required to calculate ΔU from the Brogden-Cronbach-Gleser model leads to an
       estimate of CAD $564,128 for the use of the LCIA over the expected tenure of 15 years, which
       is equivalent to CAD $37,609 yearly (ROI: 23,505%) and CAD $375,285 and CAD $37,529
       yearly (ROI: 15,637%) over a tenure of 10 years.


       Supplemental analyses – adjustments to the basic utility analysis formula
       We considered five adjustments to the basic utility analysis formula designed to improve the
       precision of our estimates. These adjustments center on the impact of employee flows
       (Boudreau, 1983b), probationary periods (De Corte, 1994), departures from top-down hiring
       (Murphy, 1986), economic adjustments (e.g. variable costs, marginal tax rates and
       discounting; Boudreau, 1983a) and the incremental validity of the LCIA over current
       placement practices at the organization (Boudreau, 1991; Raju and Burke, 1986). We decided
       to discard the first three of these adjustments given that they do not appear to be relevant to
       the focus of the present study: to examine the potential utility of promoting employees based
       on leader character. We briefly explain the nature of each of the adjustments we considered.
           Employee flows modify the basic utility analysis formula to account for the effects of the
       entrance and exit of employees over several years, including factors such as increases in the
       overall quality of employees after the LCIA is implemented. This adjustment requires careful
       tracking of employee cohorts over multiple periods in time to establish relationships between
       performance, turnover and the LCIA. However, we collected our data at a single point in time,
       and hence estimating the trajectory of the relationships among the variables of interest would
       require several assumptions which we were not prepared to make. Probationary periods
       involve estimating the effects of the dismissal of employees who do not meet a particular
       standard. It is highly unlikely this scenario applies to our study given that the employees


--- PAGE BREAK ---

                           M   SD      1          2          3         4          5          6         7          8          9         10        11        12       13

1. Character            4.38 0.29 (0.95)
2. Accountability       4.56 0.35       0.82*** (0.87)
3. Collaboration        4.32 0.38       0.85***  0.58*** (0.87)
4. Courage              4.57 0.28       0.70***  0.79***  0.42*** (0.81)
                                            ***      ***
5. Drive                4.38 0.32       0.76     0.76     0.53***   0.77*** (0.86)
6. Humanity             4.20 0.43       0.82***  0.48***  0.87***   0.32**     0.40*** (0.91)
7. Humility             4.29 0.37       0.93***  0.68***  0.86***   0.51***    0.59***   0.89*** (0.90)
8. Integrity            4.56 0.34       0.88***  0.75***  0.71***   0.62***    0.64***   0.69***   0.80*** (0.88)
                                            ***      ***      ***       ***        ***       ***
9. Judgment             4.42 0.32       0.79     0.79     0.50      0.75       0.68      0.45      0.62***   0.66*** (0.92)
10. Justice             4.31 0.36       0.90***  0.65***  0.81***   0.50***    0.59***   0.82***   0.86***   0.83***     0.63*** (0.88)
11. Temperance          4.29 0.43       0.71***  0.36***  0.64***   0.24*      0.40***   0.67***   0.69***   0.54***     0.44***     0.65*** (0.91)
12. Transcendence 4.28 0.30             0.78***  0.65***  0.55***   0.65***    0.66***   0.49***   0.66***   0.67***     0.71***     0.64***    0.46*** (0.81)
                                                                        x
13. Performance         5.40 0.83       0.30**
                                                 0.28**
                                                          0.23*
                                                                    0.17       0.35***
                                                                                         0.23*
                                                                                                   0.31**
                                                                                                             0.24 *
                                                                                                                         0.28 **
                                                                                                                                     0.23 *
                                                                                                                                                0.21*      0.18x (0.91)
Note(s): N 5 111. Leader character is the composite of all leader character dimensions. Cronbach’s alpha coefficients of reliability are on the diagonal in parentheses.
x
 p < 0.08; *p < 0.05; **p < 0.01; ***p < 0.001




                                                                                                                                                         assessment in
  Descriptive statistics
  and intercorrelations
  for peer-rated leader
      supervisor-rated




                                                                                                                                                            placement

                                                                                                                                                             Character
                                                                                                                                                             employee
         character and
          performance




             Table 1.




                                                                                                                                               711


--- PAGE BREAK ---

LODJ   considered for promotion had previously been identified as high potential employees. Finally,
41,5   departures from top-down hiring estimate the impact of offers being rejected by the best
       candidates. The pool of employees we studied was composed of individuals with the potential
       to perform in the new position and, importantly, who have expressed an interest in advancing
       within the organization. Therefore, it is highly unlikely that any candidate offered a
       promotion would reject such an offer.
           We implemented two adjustments to the basic utility formula: the impact of various
712    economic factors, and the incremental validity of the LCIA over current placement practices
       at the organization we studied. Sturman (2000) reported that these adjustments have the
       highest impact in reducing inflated estimates – on average by 84%. Boudreau (1983a)
       detailed three economic factors that impact the potential returns of implementing a new
       instrument. First, variable costs model the additional costs incurred by the organization due
       to performance increases stemming from the implementation of the new instrument (e.g.
       higher compensation, such as bonuses due to increases in employee performance) by
       multiplying SDy by a value that is representative of all variable costs identified by Boudreau
       (1983a). Second, the adjustment for taxation rates reflects the impact of taxation on potential
       profits and costs of implementing the new instrument. This adjustment is obtained by
       multiplying SDy and C by an overall taxation rate (Boudreau, 1983a). Third, adjusting for
       discounting estimates the opportunity costs associated with investing the resources
       necessary to obtain and implement the new instrument that would have been invested
       otherwise, to account for the fact that “future monetary values cannot be directly equated
       with present monetary values” (Boudreau, 1983a, p. 563). In practical terms, the adjustment
       for discounting involves replacing the T component of the basic utility analysis formula with
       a modified T that includes a yearly compounding effect of a discounting rate (see Boudreau,
       1983a, for more details on how to arrive at the modified T). Lastly, adjustments for the
       incremental validity of any new instrument over current assessments can be applied, in most
       cases, by subtracting the correlation between the current placement method and the criterion
       (job performance) (rold) from the correlation between the new instrument (the LCIA) and the
       criterion (rnew) and using the difference in correlations in place of rxy in the basic utility
       analysis formula.
           Altogether, the modified formula for utility analysis after implementing these
       adjustments can be expressed as:
                    ΔU ¼ N 3Tmod ðrold  rnew Þ3Zxs 3½SDy 3ð1 þ VCÞ3ð1  TAXÞ
                              fN ½C3ð1  TAXÞ÷SRg

       where,
          ΔU 5 Marginal utility or the estimated dollar-value savings over tenure as a result of
          using the selection device in placement
          N 5 Number of candidates placed into a position per year
          Tmod 5 Modified tenure in years of employees in a position according to discounting rate
          rold 5 Correlation between the current selection device or predictor and the criterion or job
          performance measure in the employee population
          rnew 5 Correlation between the new selection device or predictor and the criterion or job
          performance measure in the employee population
          Zxs 5 Average performance of selected candidates in standardized units
          SDy 5 Dollar value of a standard deviation in the criterion


--- PAGE BREAK ---

     VC 5 Variable costs rate                                                                                   Character
     TAX 5 Taxation rate                                                                                    assessment in
     C 5 The cost incurred in acquiring and administering the selection device per candidate
                                                                                                                employee
                                                                                                               placement
     SR 5 Selection ratio or the number of candidates placed into a position per year, divided
     by the number of candidates available per instance of placement
The necessary information required to complete the various economic adjustments was                                       713
either not known or not made available to us. Additionally, the organization did not have any
data on the validity of their current placement practices, rendering it challenging for us to
assess the incremental validity of the LCIA. However, Sturman (2000) reviewed the literature
on utility analysis and developed a realistic range of parameters for use in subsequent
calculations. Thus, we conducted a series of utility analyses using the parameters provided
by Sturman (2000) for economic factors and incremental validity to produce a range of
estimates for the potential utility of applying the LCIA in placement. Specifically, we selected
the minimum and maximum parameters reported for each adjustment, and we also calculated
the midpoint for each adjustment. This approach resulted in three parameters per
adjustment.
    The maximum value reported by Sturman (2000) for the incremental validity of a new
instrument (0.38) is, in fact, larger than the actual correlation we found in our study (see
Table 1). Therefore, we deviated from Sturman (2000) to set the maximum value for this
parameter at 0.30 and calculated a midpoint value accordingly.
    These procedures resulted in the following minimum, midpoint and maximum parameters
for each adjustment: variable costs rate (0.02, 0.185, 0.35), taxation rate (0.30, 0.465,
0.63), discounting rate (0.01, 0.06, 0.11) and incremental validity (0.05, 0.175, 0.30). The final set
of estimates was produced by conducting separate utility analyses for every possible
combination of the various adjustments, resulting in a total of 81 estimates (see Appendix for
an illustration). These analyses were conducted for expected 10-years and 15-years tenures,
for a total of 162 estimates. A summary of the results is shown in Table 2. The data in Table 2
reveal that the lowest utility estimate is CAD $8,027, for the condition with the highest
economic factors and lowest incremental validity at the 10-year tenure level. The ROI for this
estimate is 904%. The highest utility estimate includes the adjustments for the lowest
economic factors and highest incremental validity at the 15-year tenure level: CAD $357,551
and an ROI of 21,283%. These results indicate that there is still a positive and sizeable ROI
associated with the LCIA in employee placement even with highly conservative adjustments.

Discussion
Are organizational investments in human resource programs and leadership development — in
both time and money — justified by their returns? Do such programs have a dollars-and-cents



                        15-Year tenure                                    10-Year tenure
Δr           M          SD         Min          Max           M           SD         Min          Max
                                                                                                                       Table 2.
0.05       $26,863     $11,668       $9,998      $58,192       $19,502     $7,520      $8,027     $39,218   Descriptive statistics
0.175      $97,232     $41,330     $37,214     $207,871        $71,761    $26,540     $30,315    $141,462     for adjusted utility
0.30      $167,601     $70,994     $64,430     $357,551      $125,459     $50,242     $52,604    $243,706       estimates across
Note(s): The results for each level of incremental validity are based on 27 estimates using 70% of annual   expected 10- and 15-
salary as SDy. Δr 5 estimated incremental validity of the LCIA                                               year tenure periods


--- PAGE BREAK ---

LODJ   return on the investment? What is the effect size associated with such programs? These are
41,5   important questions to consider for any organizational decision-maker, in particular given the
       demand for increased accountability (e.g. from senior executives), the push for transparency
       (e.g. board members and shareholders) and the tightening budgets in organizations. Hence,
       Luthans et al. (2015) concluded that “the challenge of assessing the investments in and dollar
       return from human resources is now more pertinent than ever” (p. 241).
           Character is an essential ingredient of leadership that has been neglected for far too long in
714    both the empirical and practitioner literature on leadership. Perhaps this is because people
       think character is a highly subjective construct and hence more difficult to define and assess
       than specific competencies or skill sets that are part of — and tend to dominate — formal job
       descriptions. However, recent research has revealed a set of concrete behaviors associated
       with character dimensions that can be developed to strengthen character. Scholars have also
       begun to develop instruments to assess character and relate it to performance (see, for
       example, Crossan et al., 2017; Riggio et al., 2010; Wright et al., 2017).
           Organizational leaders will be more inclined to adopt selection and development tools –
       including assessment instruments such as the LCIA –— to facilitate character-based
       leadership if data show that such tools help provide a meaningful financial return. The
       objective of our study was to understand how much character matters financially in selecting
       employees for senior leadership positions in a large Canadian manufacturing organization.
       The results of our analysis are both illustrative and illuminating. Our data revealed a range of
       utility estimates from ΔU of CAD $8,027 over a 10-year tenure period to CAD $564,128 over a
       15-year tenure period. The estimates we provided include various adjustments to the basic
       utility analysis formula to address the myriad dynamics at play in organizations, such as
       economic conditions. We believe it is entirely plausible, and consistent with Hunter et al.
       (1990), that the dollar value associated with selection and placement based on instruments
       that assess leader character further increase for individuals at even higher levels in the
       organization, that is, for those individuals whose jobs are even more cognitively complex
       such as CFOs, COOs, CEOs and directors of boards.
           Further, we assert that selecting and promoting managers on character and developing
       their character-based leadership will not only leverage their own contributions to the
       organization but also contribute to a trickle-down effect on employees below them. This is
       because the organization’s leaders are expected to model the behaviors they want to promote
       throughout the organization. For example, leaders who act and speak with humanity beget
       others who act in similar ways. Any character-associated behaviors expressed or enacted by
       senior leaders are perceived by others, especially those at the early stages of their leadership
       development, as the behaviors that are valued in the organization (e.g. Crossan et al., 2016;
       Foulk et al., 2016; Kolk et al., 2010; Shin, 2012).
           Thus, behavioral contagion may add to the estimated dollar value. The reverse is also true:
       to ignore character in recruitment and selection may cost the organization in productivity and
       legal settlements. For example, dysfunctional behaviors that are rooted in character
       deficiencies – for example, rude, disrespectful, inflexible and unfair behaviors – are likely to
       create an outflow of people who will not stand for that kind of behavior, meaning that, over
       time, organizations may lose capable people.
           People may have difficulty believing that using the LCIA in placement could lead to a best-
       case yearly savings of 23% of a senior manager’s annual salary. However, the potential costs
       of poor leadership due to deficiencies in character can be much greater than CAD $37,609 a
       year. For example, workplace harassment settlements in Canada can rise to over $100,000 in
       some cases, and they can amount to millions of dollars in the United States. The standards for
       senior managers in addressing claims of harassment are high. Those in senior management
       positions need to demonstrate integrity to hold themselves to a high moral standard and
       behave consistently with ethical standards; with courage to show an unrelenting


--- PAGE BREAK ---

determination and perseverance in confronting the most difficult situations; temperance to              Character
conduct themselves in a calm, composed manner in addressing the issue; humanity to                  assessment in
demonstrate genuine concern and care for the victims of the injustice; and judgment to make
sound decisions in a timely manner based on relevant information and critical analysis
                                                                                                        employee
of facts.                                                                                              placement
    The costs associated with poor leader character tend to escalate as the position and
authority of the leader increases. For example, Volkswagen has paid more than US$25 billion
in fines, penalties and settlements since US officials charged the automaker in 2015 with                   715
breaking environmental laws by cheating on diesel emissions tests (e.g. Boston and Michaels,
2019; Ewing, 2018; Rogers and Spector, 2017). Martin Winterkorn, the CEO of Volkswagen
during the scandal, was charged with fraud and could face a prison sentence. His salary in
2014 was US$18 million — a relatively minor component of the overall cost to the
organization, which saw its stock drop by a third when the scandal broke (e.g. Bryan, 2017;
Snyder and Jones, 2015).
    How could the fortunes of one of the world’s largest automakers deteriorate so rapidly?
We believe the answer lies, in part, in the lack of character at the top of the organization. For
example, a key element of good risk management is asking appropriate questions and getting
truthful answers. And so, if a CEO, or any other senior executive for that matter, does not
demand that leaders and managers root out unethical conduct by asking the tough questions
and holding people accountable, then that bad behavior is likely to gradually spread like a
weed throughout the organization. The German magazine Der Spiegel in 2013 compared
Volkswagen’s corporate culture to that of “North Korea minus the labor camps.” Employees
felt they had to obey directives and were actively prevented from flagging problems and
raising concerns out of fear that doing so might jeopardize ambitious goals set by the senior
leadership team. Winterkorn was convinced that diesel engines rather than electric vehicles
were the company’s future, and with most executives afraid to question him, it appears the
automaker did everything it could to boost the sale of diesel-powered vehicles, even in the face
of conflicting engineering and market information (e.g. Ewing and Bowley, 2015; Gapper,
2018). Nowhere in this story do we see a value-based culture characterized by humility, open-
mindedness, consideration, integrity, temperance, courage or accountability – or for that
matter, any other dimension of leader character.
    Hence, as our results suggest, organizations in the public, private and not-for-profit
sectors simply need to recognize the importance of assessing and developing leader
character. The issue of leadership character can be ignored, but the price of doing so cannot
be when paying for this neglect.

Strengths and limitations
Utility analysis is a quantitative and robust method of evaluating human resource programs.
For example, the method allows human resource professionals to assess whether a selection
program using a particular tool yields a positive utility versus selecting individuals at
random. Our paper is an illustration of the potential utility of the LCIA in a selection process
for senior managers. There are several strengths associated with our study. First, we used
actual and objective multi-source data from the field. Second, we used supervisor
assessments of performance rather than self-assessments. Supervisor ratings are
commonly used in performance assessments and scholarly research. Third, we used a
behaviorally based and validated instrument to assess character. Behaviorally based
statements are the preferred method of assessment given that they measure what people
actually do on the job, are less susceptible to biases outside the control of the person being
evaluated and typically show higher inter-rater reliability than trait-based measures (e.g.
Latham et al., 2005; Latham and Wexley, 1994). Fourth, the performance assessment and the


--- PAGE BREAK ---

LODJ   assessment of character were conducted by different sources, hence eliminating common-
41,5   method and same-rater bias. Fifth, we used a realistic estimate of SDy based on actual salary
       information provided by the organization. Sixth, we included various adjustments in
       calculating the estimates using the basic utility analysis function. And while these estimates
       predictably declined in magnitude, the utility if the LCIA remained positive and appears to be
       of substantial value – an ROI over 900% is our most conservative estimate.
           Nevertheless, as with any study, there are limitations that need to be acknowledged. First,
716    there is a rich literature on the best methods to estimate the return of human resource
       interventions. Luthans et al. (2015) observed that “debates regarding the reliability, validity
       and utility of various approaches for quantifying the return on investment and value of
       human resources and development are far from resolved” (p. 241). We used a straightforward
       and widely recognized approach to estimate the return on investment of using the LCIA in
       placement (see, for example, Cascio and Boudreau, 2011; Luthans et al., 2015; Tziner and
       Birati, 2015). Luthans, Youssef and Avolio (2007) explained that “research has found that the
       complexity of traditional utility analysis may actually challenge the credibility of its results
       as perceived by managers, possibly even reversing its intended impact” (p. 217). The
       approaches to utility analysis vary widely in depth, breadth and complexity. Hence, it is likely
       the different approaches result in somewhat different estimates. Second, the instrument we
       used to assess character – the LCIA – is one of several measures of character. The assumption
       that the estimated returns may be greater or smaller using other instruments is reasonable.
       Third, we used a concurrent validity design. Barrett et al. (1981) found no substantial
       differences in results between concurrent validity and predictive validity design.
       Nevertheless, future studies should explore this assertion in more detail and include
       measures of performance after individuals were placed in leadership roles. Fourth, although
       different raters assessed performance and leader character, our design does not allow us to
       tease apart whether character contributes to improved performance or whether those with
       high performance are seen as people of high character. Future studies therefore need to
       establish causality through training and developing character, including the use of control
       groups, to more firmly establish the impact of character-based leadership. Fifth, the
       administration of the LCIA at multiple time intervals to assess character – and its stability –
       would further strengthen our analysis. And lastly, utility analysis is based on the
       contribution of a measure, not of a construct. The assumption behind utility analysis is that
       the construct underlying the measure is driving the potential utility, but ultimately we are
       estimating the potential value of the measure itself. Prior studies have shown that leader
       character predicts performance. Future research designs should continue to include a myriad
       of variables to show that character predicts managerial performance – and thus has a dollars-
       and-cents return – beyond constructs known to predict performance including demographic
       variables.

       References
       Barrett, G.V., Phillips, J.S. and Alexander, R.A. (1981), “Concurrent and predictive validity designs: a
             critical reanalysis”, Journal of Applied Psychology, Vol. 66, pp. 1-6.
       Becker, B.E. and Huselid, M.A. (1992), “Direct estimates of SDy and the implications for utility
             analysis”, Journal of Applied Psychology, Vol. 77, pp. 227-233.
       Boston, W. and Michaels, D. (2019), “SEC charges Volkswagen with defrauding U.S. bond investors”,
             The Wall Street Journal, March 15.
       Boudreau, J.W. (1983a), “Economic considerations in estimating the utility of human resource
            productivity improvements”, Personnel Psychology, Vol. 36, pp. 551-557.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

Boudreau, J.W. (1983b), “Effects of employee flows on utility analysis of human resource productivity           Character
     improvement programs”, Personnel Psychology, Vol. 68, pp. 396-407.
                                                                                                            assessment in
Boudreau, J.W. (1991), “Utility analysis for decisions in human resource management”, in Dunnette,
     M.D. and Hough, L.M. (Eds), Handbook of Industrial and Organizational Psychology, Consulting
                                                                                                                employee
     Psychologists Press, Alo Alto, CA, pp. 621-745.                                                           placement
Bright, D.S., Cameron, K.S. and Caza, A. (2006), “The amplifying and buffering effects of virtuousness
      in downsized organizations”, Journal of Business Ethics, Vol. 64, pp. 249-269.
                                                                                                                    717
Brogden, H.E. (1946), “On the interpretation of the correlation coefficient as a measure of predictive
     efficiency”, Journal of Educational Psychology, Vol. 37, pp. 64-76.
Bryan, V. (2017), Volkswagen plans to cap CEO pay at 10 million euros: sourc, Reuters, February 6.
Campion, M.C., Campion, E.D. and Campion, M.A. (2015), “Improvements in performance
     management through the use of 360 feedback”, Industrial and Organizational Psychology,
     Vol. 8, pp. 85-93.
Cascio, W.F. (1999), Costing Human Resources: The Financial Impact of Behavior in Organizations, 4th
      ed., South-Western College Publishing, Cincinnati, OH.
Cascio, W.F. and Aguinis, H. (2011), Applied Psychology in Human Resource Management, 7th ed.,
      Prentice-Hall, Upper Saddle River, NJ.
Cascio, W.F. and Boudreau, J.W. (2008), Investing People: Financial Impact of Human Resource
      Initiatives, Pearson/Financial Times Publishing, Upper Saddle River, NJ.
Cohen, T.R., Panter, A.T., Turan, N., Morse, L. and Kim, Y. (2014), “Moral character in the workplace”,
     Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, Vol. 107, pp. 943-963.
Cronbach, L.J. and Gleser, G.C. (1965), Psychological Tests and Personnel Decisions, 2nd ed., University
     of Illinois Press, Urbana. IL.
Crossan, M.M., Seijts, G.H. and Gandz, J. (2014), Leader Character Insight Assessment, Sigma
      Assessment Systems, London, ON.
Crossan, M., Seijts, G. and Gandz, J. (2016), Developing Leadership Character, Routledge, New
      York, NY.
Crossan, M.M., Byrne, A., Seijts, G.H., Reno, M., Monzani, L. and Gandz, J. (2017), “Toward a
      framework of leader character in organizations”, Journal of Management Studies, Vol. 54,
      pp. 986-1018.
De Corte, W. (1994), “Utility analysis for the one-cohort selection-retention decision with a
     probationary period”, Journal of Applied Psychology, Vol. 79, pp. 402-411.
Ewing, J. (2018), “Ex-Volkswagen CEO charged with fraud over diesel emissions”, The New York
     Times, May 3.
Ewing, J. and Bowley, G. (2015), “The engineering of Volkswagen’s aggressive ambition”, The New
     York Times, December 13.
Foulk, T., Woolum, A. and Erez, A. (2016), “Catching rudeness is like catching a cold: the contagion
      effects of low-intensity negative behaviors”, Journal of Applied Psychology, Vol. 101, pp. 50-67.
Gapper, J. (2018), “Martin Winterkorn’s prosecution has benefits for VW”, Financial Times, May 4.
Good Jobs First (2016), “Volkswagen AG violation tracker individual record”, available at: https://
     violationtracker.goodjobsfirst.org/prog.php?parent5volkswagen.
Hannah, S.T. and Avolio, B.J. (2011), “Leader character, ethos, and virtue: individual and collective
     considerations”, The Leadership Quarterly, Vol. 22 No. 5, pp. 989-994.
Holling, H. (1998), “Utility analysis of personnel selection: an overview and empirical study based on
      objective performance measures”, Methods of Psychological Research, Vol. 3, pp. 5-24.
Hunter, J.E., Schmidt, F.L. and Judiesch, M.K. (1990), “Individual differences in output variability as a
     function of job complexity”, Journal of Applied Psychology, Vol. 75, pp. 28-42.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

LODJ   Judiesch, M.K., Schmidt, F.L. and Mount, M.K. (1992), “Estimates of the dollar value of employee
             output in utility analyses: an empirical test of two theories”, Journal of Applied Psychology,
41,5         Vol. 77, pp. 234-250.
       Kolk, A., van Dolen, W. and Vock, M. (2010), “Trickle effects of cross-sector social partnerships”,
             Journal of Business Ethics, Vol. 94, pp. 123-137.
       Latham, G.P. and Wexley, K.N. (1994), Increasing Productivity through Performance Appraisal,
            Addison-Wesley, Reading, MA.
718
       Latham, G.P. and Whyte, G. (1994), “The futility of utility analysis”, Personnel Psychology, Vol. 47,
            pp. 31-46.
       Latham, G.P., Almost, J., Mann, S. and Moore, C. (2005), “New developments in performance
            management”, Organizational Dynamics, Vol. 34, pp. 77-87.
       LeBreton, J.M. and Senter, J.L. (2008), “Answers to 20 questions about interrater reliability and
             interrater agreement”, Organizational Research Methods, Vol. 11, pp. 815-852.
       Liborius, P. (2017), “What does leaders’ character add to transformational leadership?”, Journal of
             Psychology, Vol. 151, pp. 299-320.
       Luthans, F., Youssef, C.M. and Avolio, B.J. (2007), Psychological Capital: Developing the Human
            Competitive Edge, Oxford University Press, New York, NY.
       Luthans, F., Youssef, C.M. and Avolio, B.J. (2015), Psychological Capital and beyond, Oxford University
            Press, New York, NY.
       Macan, T.H. and Highhouse, S. (1994), “Communicating the utility of human resource activities: a
            survey of I/O and HR professionals”, Journal of Business and Psychology, Vol. 8, pp. 425-436.
       McCauley, C.D. and Moxley, R.S. (1996), “Developmental 360: how feedback can make managers more
            effective”, Career Development International, Vol. 1, pp. 15-19.
       Murphy, K.R. (1986), “When your top choice turns you down: effect of rejected offers on the utility of
            selection tests”, Psychological Bulletin, Vol. 99, pp. 133-138.
       Naylor, J.C. and Shine, L.C. (1965), “A table for determining the increase in mean criterion score
             obtained by using a selection device”, Journal of Industrial Psychology, Vol. 3, pp. 33-42.
       O’Boyle, E. Jr and Aguinis, H. (2012), “The best and the rest: revisiting the norm of normality of
            individual performance”, Personnel Psychology, Vol. 65, pp. 79-119.
       Palanski, M.E., Cullen, K.L., Gentry, W.A. and Nichols, C.M. (2015), “Virtuous leadership: exploring the
             effects of leader courage and behavioral integrity on leader performance and image”, Journal of
             Business Ethics, Vol. 132, pp. 297-310.
       Peterson, C. and Seligman, M.E.P. (2004), Character Strengths and Virtues, Oxford University Press,
             New York, NY.
       Raju, N.S. and Burke, M.J. (1986), “Utility analysis”, in Berk, R.A. (Ed.), Performance Assessment:
             Methods and Applications, Johns Hopkins, Baltimore, MD, pp. 186-202.
       Reise, S.P., Ventura, J., Nuechterlein, K.H. and Kim, K.H. (2005), “An illustration of multilevel factor
              analysis”, Journal of Personality Assessment, Vol. 84, pp. 126-136.
       Riggio, R.E., Zhu, W., Reina, C. and Maroosis, J.A. (2010), “Virtue-based measurement of ethical
             leadership: the leadership virtues questionnaire”, Consulting Psychology Journal: Practice and
             Research, Vol. 62, pp. 235-250.
       Rogers, C. and Spector, M. (2017), “Judge slaps VW with $2.8 billion criminal fine in emissions fraud”,
            The Wall Street Journal, April 21.
       Russell, R.F. (2001), “The role of values in servant leadership”, The Leadership and Organization
             Development Journal, Vol. 22, pp. 76-84.
       Schmidt, F.L. and Hunter, J.E. (1983), “Individual differences in productivity: an empirical test of
            estimates derived from studies of selection procedure utility”, Journal of Applied Psychology,
            Vol. 68, pp. 407-414.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

Schmidt, F.L., Hunter, J.E., McKenzie, R.C. and Muldrow, T.W. (1979), “Impact of valid selection                 Character
     procedures on work-force productivity”, Journal of Applied Psychology, Vol. 64, pp. 609-626.
                                                                                                             assessment in
Schwartz, S.H. and Bilsky, W. (1987), “Toward a universal psychological structure of human values”,
     Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, Vol. 53, p. 550.
                                                                                                                 employee
Seijts, G., Gandz, J., Crossan, M. and Reno, M. (2015), “Character matters: character dimensions’ impact
                                                                                                                placement
        on leader performance and outcomes”, Organizational Dynamics, Vol. 44, pp. 65-74.
Seijts, G., Byrne, A., Crossan, M.M. and Gandz, J. (2019), “Leader character in board governance”,                   719
        Journal of Management and Governance, Vol. 23, pp. 227-258.
Shin, Y. (2012), “CEO ethical leadership, ethical climate, climate strength, and collective organizational
      citizenship behavior”, Journal of Business Ethics, Vol. 108, pp. 299-312.
Snyder, B. and Jones, S. (2015), “Here’s a timeline of Volkswagen’s tanking stock price”, Fortune,
     September 23.
Sturm, R.E., Vera, D. and Crossan, M. (2017), “The entanglement of leader character and leader
     competence and its impact on performance”, The Leadership Quarterly, Vol. 28,
     pp. 349-366.
Sturman, M.C. (2000), “Implications of utility analysis adjustments for estimates of human resource
     intervention value”, Journal of Management, Vol. 26, pp. 281-299.
Sturman, M.C. (2012), “Employee value: combining utility analysis with strategic human resource
     management research to yield strong theory”, in Schmitt, N. (Ed.), The Oxford Handbook of
     Personnel Assessment and Selection, Oxford University Press, New York, NY, pp. 768-792.
Taylor, H.C. and Russell, J.T. (1939), “The relationship of validity coefficients to the practical
      effectiveness of tests in selection”, Journal of Applied Psychology, Vol. 23, pp. 565-578.
Toegel, G. and Conger, J.A. (2003), “360-degree assessment: time for reinvention”, The Academy of
     Management Learning and Education, Vol. 2, pp. 297-311.
Tziner, A. and Birati, A. (2015), “Assessing the financial value of human resource management
      programs and employee behaviors: a critical tool still coming of age”, Amfiteatru Economic,
      Vol. 17, pp. 1259-1272.
Wang, G. and Hackett, R.D. (2016), “Conceptualization and measurement of virtuous leadership: doing
     well by doing good”, Journal of Business Ethics, Vol. 137, pp. 321-345.
Whyte, G. and Latham, G.P. (1997), “The futility of utility analysis revisited: when even an expert
     fails”, Personnel Psychology, Vol. 50, pp. 601-610.
Winkler, S., K€onig, C.J. and Kleinmann, M. (2010), “Single-attribute utility analysis may be futile, but
     this can’t be the end of the story: causal chain analysis as an alternative”, Personnel Psychology,
     Vol. 63, pp. 1041-1065.
Wright, T.A. (2011), “Character assessment in business ethics education”, in Swanson, D.L. and
     Fisher, D.G. (Eds), Got Ethics? Toward Assessing Business Ethics Education, Information Age
     Publishing, Charlotte, NC, pp. 361-380.
Wright, T. and Goodstein, J. (2007), “Character is not “dead” in management research: a review of
     individual character and organizational-level virtue”, Journal of Management, Vol. 33,
     pp. 928-958.
Wright, T.A. and Huang, C.-C. (2008), “Character in organizational research: past directions and future
     prospects”, Journal of Organizational Behavior, Vol. 29, pp. 981-987.
Wright, T.A. and Quick, J.C. (2011), “The role of character in ethical leadership research”, The
     Leadership Quarterly, Vol. 22, pp. 975-978.
Wright, T.A., Quick, J.C., Hannah, S.T. and Blake Hargrove, M. (2017), “Best practice recommendations
     for scale construction in organizational research: the development and initial validation of the
     Character Strength Inventory (CSI)”, Journal of Organizational Behavior, Vol. 38, pp. 615-628.


--- PAGE BREAK ---

LODJ                            Appendix
                                Illustration of the calculation for the utility estimate
41,5                            The following is an example of how each utility estimate was calculated. The formula presented below
                                uses an expected tenure of 15 years, the minimum parameters for the three economic adjustments and
                                the maximum parameter for the incremental validity of the LCIA over the current placement practices at
                                the manufacturing organization. Note that values throughout have been rounded for ease of illustration.
                                               ΔU ¼ N 3Tmod ðrold  rnew Þ3Zxs 3½SDy 3ð1 þ VCÞ3ð1  TAXÞ
720
                                                         fN ½C3ð1  TAXÞ÷SRÞg

                                   Step 1: ΔU 5 1 3 13.865 (0.30) 3 1.09 3 [$115,500 3 (10.02)] 3 (10.30)]
                                                 {1 [800 3 (10.30)] ÷ 0.33)}
                                   Step 2: ΔU 5 13.865 (0.30) 3 1.09 3 [$115,500 3 (0.98) 3 (0.70)]  {$1,681}
                                   Step 3: ΔU 5 4.160 3 1.09 3 [$115,500 3 (0.686)]  {$1,681}
                                   Step 4: ΔU 5 4.533 3 $79,233  $1,681
                                   Step 5: ΔU 5 $359,163  $1,681
                                   Step 6: ΔU 5 $357,482
                                   ΔU 5 Estimated dollar-value savings over an expected 15-year tenure as a result of the LCIA
                                   N 5 Number of candidates placed into a position per year (1 candidate)
                                   Tmod 5 Modified tenure for 15 years based on a discounting rate of 0.01 (13.865) (provided by
                                   Boudreau (1983a))
                                   rold  rnew 5 Difference between the validity coefficients of the current method (0.00) and the
                                   LCIA (0.30)
                                   Zxs 5 Average performance of selected candidates in standardized units, using a selection ratio of
                                   0.33 (provided by the organization) and Naylor and Shine’s (1965) tables for determining the increase
                                   in mean criterion score (1.09)
                                   SDy 5 Dollar value of a standard deviation in the criterion using 70% of annual salary ($115,500)
                                   VC 5 Variable costs rate (0.02) (provided by Sturman, 2000)
                                   TAX 5 Taxation rate (0.30) (provided by Sturman, 2000)
                                   C 5 The cost incurred in acquiring and administering the selection device per candidate ($800)
                                   SR 5 Selection ratio or the number of candidates placed into a position per year, divided by the
                                   number of candidates available per instance of placement (0.33)



                                Corresponding author
                                Gerard Seijts can be contacted at: gseijts@ivey.ca




                                For instructions on how to order reprints of this article, please visit our website:
                                www.emeraldgrouppublishing.com/licensing/reprints.htm
                                Or contact us for further details: permissions@emeraldinsight.com




       View publication stats

