         Canadian Journal of Disability Studies

Published by the Canadian Disability Studies Association
  Association Canadienne des Études sur le handicap

         Hosted by The University of Waterloo

                 www.cjds.uwaterloo.ca

                cjdseditor@uwaterloo.ca


--- PAGE BREAK ---

Building the “Business Case” for Hiring People with Disabilities: A Financial Cost-Benefit
                          Analysis Methodology and Example

   Dr. Sandra L. Fisher, Senior Research Fellow and Lecturer, Münster School of Business,
                           Münster University of Applied Sciences
                                 sandy.fisher@fh-muenster.de
   Dr. Catherine E. Connelly, Professor, DeGroote School of Business, McMaster University
                                    connell@mcmaster.ca


Abstract
This paper demonstrates a technique to empirically estimate the financial costs (or savings) of
employing people with disabilities, in order to provide a mechanism for organizations to develop
a “business case” for hiring these employees. We conducted a utility analysis, a technique
common in Human Resources Management (HRM), to illustrate how the financial net value can
be calculated based on the difference between service costs and service value. Employment costs
include those related to wages, health benefits, pensions, life insurance, vacation pay, training,
safety, absences, lateness, turnover, and disability accommodations. Service value estimates are
based on wages and are adjusted for performance levels. The data used for our example is drawn
from a food services company in Canada. Employees with disabilities in this example provided
higher net value to the organization because of their average to above-average performance and
lower turnover costs. More importantly, we demonstrate a process that can be used to assess the
financial value of hiring workers with disabilities. Given the negative preconceptions often
associated with hiring workers with disabilities, this method and example can provide evidence
that will be useful for managers and disability advocates for assisting people who wish to join the
workforce.




Keywords: business case, utility analysis, financial costs, financial savings, net benefits,
accommodations


--- PAGE BREAK ---

                                                  Fisher & Connelly, Utility Analysis Methodology
                                                                        CJDS 10.1 (January 2021)

Building the “Business Case” for Hiring People with Disabilities: A Financial Cost-Benefit
                          Analysis Methodology and Example

   Dr. Sandra L. Fisher, Senior Research Fellow and Lecturer, Münster School of Business,
                           Münster University of Applied Sciences
                                 sandy.fisher@fh-muenster.de
   Dr. Catherine E. Connelly, Professor, DeGroote School of Business, McMaster University
                                    connell@mcmaster.ca

Introduction

Work is beneficial for a broad array of reasons; it provides structure, meaning, an opportunity for

social interactions, as well as a salary (Lastuka & Cottingham, 2016). Despite some stereotypes

to the contrary, people with disabilities seek employment at approximately the same rate as the

non-disabled workforce, and place a similar value on job security, income, promotion

opportunities, having an interesting job, and having a job that contributes to society (Ali et al.,

2011; Lindsay et al., 2016). Employment is not the only way in which people with disabilities

can add value to society (e.g., Graby, 2015) but is a path desired by many.

       Unfortunately, people with disabilities routinely have difficulty finding and maintaining

employment, resulting in high unemployment rates around the world (Houtenville & Boege,

2019; Mavranezouli et al., 2014). Some disabilities may limit some people’s abilities to perform

certain jobs. However, much of this employment disparity is attributed to biases or

misunderstandings by hiring organizations and managers. There is evidence that hiring managers

hold negative perceptions and stereotypes about the ability of people with disabilities to perform

work (Bonaccio et al., 2020). There is evidence that many employers are concerned that people

with disabilities are not qualified for the available jobs (e.g., Kaye et al., 2011) or will have

lower performance than employees without documented disabilities (Lengnick-Hall et al., 2008;

Scott et al., 2017). However, based on social exchange theory (Blau, 1964), workers with

disabilities may feel greater obligation to a company that gives them the opportunity for


                                                  71


--- PAGE BREAK ---

                                                  Fisher & Connelly, Utility Analysis Methodology
                                                                        CJDS 10.1 (January 2021)

employment, leading to increased service value. Further, many hiring managers are aware of the

requirement to create reasonable accommodations that would allow a person with a disability to

perform a job and have concern about potentially higher costs of employing such individuals

(Domzal et al., 2008; Scott et al., 2017).

        Human resource management offers a technique, utility analysis, that allows

organizations to evaluate the financial costs and benefits of different HR practices. Variations on

utility analysis have been performed to determine the financial benefits of different approaches

to pay-for-performance (Klaas & McClendon, 1996; Sturman et al., 2003) and to examine the

financial costs of workplace phenomena such as sexual harassment and substandard performance

(Faley et al., 1999; Griffeth et al., 2011).

        Utility analysis requires that the organization estimate the financial value of each

worker’s performance, the extent to which his or her performance improves or diminishes if the

new initiative is put into place, and the costs of the proposed initiative. For example, if an

employer were considering a new training program for warehouse employees, estimates would

be required of the average value of the employees’ performance, the extent to which their

performance might improve as a result of the training program, and all the costs of the program,

including worker time away from the job, the program development costs, and the salary of the

trainer. If the total costs of the program are estimated to be higher than the prospective gains, the

organization may decide against implementing the program, or find ways to either enhance the

effectiveness of the training or decrease its costs. Thus, utility analysis gives managers a way to

discuss advantages and disadvantages of HR initiatives in financial terms, which can provide a

common language and framework for decision making.




                                                 72


--- PAGE BREAK ---

                                                  Fisher & Connelly, Utility Analysis Methodology
                                                                        CJDS 10.1 (January 2021)

Purpose of the paper

The purpose of this paper is to demonstrate a technique for empirically estimating the true costs

involved in employing people with disabilities, thereby providing a mechanism for the

development of the “business case” for hiring these employees. This technique can provide

evidence for managers and rehabilitation professionals, helping them to demonstrate the potential

impact (or lack of impact) of hiring people with disabilities. Our goal is to provide a useful tool

for people who are pushing back against a stereotype that people with disabilities cannot work,

cannot work productively, or should only be hired for charitable reasons. Similar to the above

example of training, we can build a financial model showing the value and added costs (i.e., net

value) of workers with disabilities and compare that to workers without disabilities.



Methodology

The general utility model

The general utility model is based on a framework of estimating the total “service value” that an

employee or class of employees brings to an organization, then subtracting out the estimated

“service costs” incurred by employing that person (Sturman et al., 2003; Fisher & Connelly,

2017) as shown in Table 1. This analysis can be conducted with actual employee data or with

estimates for subgroups of employees in different jobs, work teams, or other classifications.

Employee subgroups can be compared to determine if there are significant differences. For

example, workers with and without disabilities could be compared to determine if there are

differences in any of the three categories: service costs, service value, or net value.




                                                  73


--- PAGE BREAK ---

                                                Fisher & Connelly, Utility Analysis Methodology
                                                                      CJDS 10.1 (January 2021)

Table 1: General Utility Analysis Model

                            Definition                                  Equation
               The overall value an employee         Net value = [Service value] – [Service costs]
Net value
               brings to the organization
               The financial value that an           Service value = [Annual wages * 1.754] ±
Service
               employee brings to an                 [Performance adjustment]
value
               organization
               The costs, direct or indirect,        Service costs = [Direct salary costs] +
Service
               employees create for an               [Benefits costs] + [Behavioral costs] +
costs
               organization                          [Turnover costs] + [Accommodation costs]


       Service costs include all costs of employing an individual (see Table 2). We look at five

different types of costs:

a) Direct salary can be an annual salary or hourly wages multiplied by the annual hours worked.

   Any overtime wages are included here as well.

b) Benefits include statutory and voluntary benefits provided by the employer, including taxes,

   health insurance, and retirement benefits. These costs are often relatively constant within a

   job grouping, as employees within a workgroup are typically all eligible for a certain set of

   benefits.

c) Behavioral costs are additional costs incurred based on how employees behave over the year,

   including costs of absences and safety-related incidents. These can vary significantly

   between individuals.

d) Turnover costs appear when an employee leaves the organization. These costs include

   reduced productivity before departure, hiring costs for a replacement employee, and other

   transitional costs (Allen, 2008; Tracey & Hinkin, 2008).

e) We also include specific costs for accommodating workers with disabilities (e.g., additional

   equipment or materials). These costs could be incurred once (e.g., specialized software or a

   modification to a workstation) or repeatedly (e.g., a sign-language translator).


                                                74


--- PAGE BREAK ---

                                                 Fisher & Connelly, Utility Analysis Methodology
                                                                       CJDS 10.1 (January 2021)

Table 2: Potential Service Costs

 a) Direct wages        Hourly rate * actual hours worked
 b) Benefits            Health benefits
                        Pension
                        Mandatory benefits (government pension, employment insurance)
                        Life insurance
                        Vacation pay
                        Training (new hire training, on-the-job training)
                        Bereavement and jury duty pay
 c) Behavioral costs    Absences
                        Lateness
                        Safety incidents
 d) Turnover            Costs involved in replacing an employee
 e) Disability          Initial accommodation upon hiring
    accommodation       Continued annual accommodation costs


       Service value is the total financial value each employee brings to an organization

(Sturman et al., 2003; Fisher & Connelly, 2017). It is estimated from the performance of the

employee. The value of any given worker to an organization is partially indicated by the wages

paid to that employee. Wages and value are positively correlated but wages are an imperfect

measure of value, partially because two employees making the same wage may perform at

different levels and thus have a different level of contribution.

       We make two adjustments to wages to create a more refined estimate of value.

1) We apply an established salary multiplier of 1.754 (Schmidt & Hunter, 1983; Sturman et al.,

   2003) to convert wages into value. This multiplier recognizes that in general, employers

   expect to gain more value from an employee than they pay out in direct wages (i.e., each

   employee is assumed to generate value to the organization equal to 1.754 times their

   salaries). This value was established by examining productivity data across a variety of

   occupations in the United States in the mid-twentieth century. While this value may need

   updating due to productivity improvements due to more advanced technologies in the



                                                 75


--- PAGE BREAK ---

                                                Fisher & Connelly, Utility Analysis Methodology
                                                                      CJDS 10.1 (January 2021)

   workplace, this multiplier has been judged in the research literature (Sturman et al., 2003) as

   superior to other approaches for estimating value such as using average work group salary as

   an indicator of value.

2) We adjust this estimate by taking into account the performance of the employee. High

   performing employees bring much more value to a company than do low performing

   employees (Griffith et al., 2011). Therefore, we adjust service value estimates for different

   levels of performance, adding more value for high performers and reducing value for low

   performers.

Service costs are summed and then subtracted from service value to determine the overall net

value for each employee.



The case study method

We conducted a case study within a small department of a large Canadian hospitality service

organization to test our model. All values are presented in Canadian dollars. The department had

46 workers, seven of whom had a documented disability (in this case cognitive or sensory). The

anonymized data were provided to us directly by the company’s human resources department in

spreadsheet format.

       We first calculated the service costs for each employee. We did not include all of the

components listed in Table 2 because some of the benefits were not provided to employees by

the case study organization.

a) Direct Wages: We used hourly pay rates and annualized hours worked to calculate the salary

   paid to each worker during the year.




                                               76


--- PAGE BREAK ---

                                                Fisher & Connelly, Utility Analysis Methodology
                                                                      CJDS 10.1 (January 2021)

b) Benefits: Data on vacation pay were not provided by the employer and are assumed to have

   been paid in addition to direct wages at 4%. Employer contributions for federally mandated

   benefits (Canada Pension Plan [CPP] and employment insurance [EI]) were estimated using

   published contribution rates for 2015, the year in which employee data were recorded. CPP

   was 4.95% of wages and EI was 1.88% of wages multiplied by 1.4 for the employer

   contribution.

c) Behavioral costs: We then had to convert many of the company’s human capital metrics

   (e.g., turnover, absences, lateness, safety incidents) into financial metrics using information

   derived from our prior research, publicly available datasets, and best practices estimates. For

   example, we assumed that the cost of turnover (an employee leaving and having to be

   replaced) was equivalent to one year of wages for that position (Allen, 2008) to represent the

   costs involved in hiring, training, and reduced performance levels during transition periods.

   Lateness and absences were both estimated to result in costs of one hour of wages due to

   work disruptions. There are many different approaches to costing worker absences depending

   on the impact on the work unit and approach for covering the absence. In this organization,

   employees are considered full time at 37.5 hours per week and provincial law in Ontario

   requires that workers be paid overtime after 44 working hours within one week (i.e., the

   hours of work cannot be averaged over a pay period). Thus, workers could be called in for

   one extra shift per week without incurring overtime costs. In the event of an absence,

   management would simply call in another worker, resulting in some disruption at the

   beginning of the shift similar to what would occur with a lateness.

d) Turnover costs: Estimates of turnover costs generally range from 1 to 2.5 times the annual

   salary (Sturman et al., 2003). Here we use the lower estimate to be conservative and because




                                                77


--- PAGE BREAK ---

                                               Fisher & Connelly, Utility Analysis Methodology
                                                                     CJDS 10.1 (January 2021)

   of the relatively low job complexity (Tracey & Hinkin, 2008). We estimated the average cost

   of a safety incident at $800 based on hospitality industry data from governmental centers in

   the United States and Canada (OSHA, WorkSafeBC).

e) Disability accommodation costs: The accommodation provided was the supervisor’s estimate

   of the cost of additional paper towels needed to write down food orders for the cooks who

   were deaf. Employees without hearing disabilities received food orders orally.

       The second step was to calculate the service value for each employee. To calculate

service value, we computed the annualized wage for each employee and multiplied that by the

1.754 standard multiplier.

       We then adjusted each employee’s service value for performance differences using an

SDy model (Schmidt & Hunter, 1983) that estimates the monetary value of one standard

deviation difference in performance, either above or below the mean. Performance ratings were

on a scale from 1-10 with an average rating of 6.8 and standard deviation of .96. For employees

with an above average performance rating, we added one standard deviation of service value

($9,783) to their score. For employees with a below average rating, we subtracted one standard

deviation of service value. Employees at the average performance rating of 7 had no adjustment.

Four employees with disabilities had above average performance and three had average

performance. Six employees without disabilities had above average performance, 16 had average

performance, and 17 had below average performance.

       We then calculated net value by subtracting service costs from service value for each

employee. We calculated both the regular net value and the adjusted net value. Adjusted net

value takes into account the adjustments for high and low levels of performance, such that

employees with high levels of performance add more value to the organization. Finally, we




                                               78


--- PAGE BREAK ---

                                                 Fisher & Connelly, Utility Analysis Methodology
                                                                       CJDS 10.1 (January 2021)

compared employee groups on the three primary variables (service costs, service value, and net

value) as well as many of the individual measures so we could understand the source of the

variance.



Results

The results of our analysis indicated that while workers without disabilities had higher initial

service value on average than workers with disabilities ($44,347 compared to $34,524), the

workers with disabilities had higher net value than non-disabled workers by an average of $868

annually before considering performance adjustments, and $15,483 annually when considering

performance.

         This differential is explained primarily by higher performance ratings and lower turnover

for workers with disabilities. Average wage costs were lower for workers with disabilities. This

was due to differences in hourly wage rates ($13.50 for workers without disabilities and $12.25

for workers with disabilities, primarily because of lower seniority) and because two of the

workers with disabilities worked part-time while all of the workers without disabilities were full-

time. Seven workers without disabilities (18%) left the organization during the case study year

and none with disabilities left. We estimate this turnover cost the organization an average of

$23,370 per departing employee (total annual cost of $163,594) in all factors related to turnover

such as disruption due to an employee leaving, recruiting and hiring costs, new employee

orientation costs, and lower productivity of the new employee (Allen, 2008; Hillmer et al.,

2004).

         Similarly, absences were lower among workers with disabilities, with 6.5 absences per

year for workers without disabilities and 3.0 for workers with disabilities. This contributed to the




                                                 79


--- PAGE BREAK ---

                                               Fisher & Connelly, Utility Analysis Methodology
                                                                     CJDS 10.1 (January 2021)

lower behavioral costs for workers with disabilities ($169.93 compared to $375.86).

Accommodation costs were low in this sample. Four of the workers with disabilities had no

accommodation costs at all, and the other three had only a $5 cost for accommodation during the

year. Table 3 shows the average service costs for each element by employee group.



Table 3: Average Service Costs for Employees with and without Disabilities


                              Average       Average      Average          Average          Total
                Average
                              benefits     behavioral    turnover      accommodation      average
               wage costs
                               costs         costs         costs           costs           costs
Employees
with            $19,683        $2,525         $170            $0            $2.14        $22,380
disabilities
Employees
without         $25,300        $3,200         $376        $4,195             $0          $33,071
disabilities


The average service values for employees with and without disabilities are shown in Table 4.


Table 4: Service Value for Employees with and without Disabilities

                                   Average service value           Average service value including
                                 (annual wage * multiplier)           performance adjustment
Employees with disabilities               $34,524                             $44,329
Employees without
                                          $44,347                             $39,537
disabilities


Table 5 shows the net value calculations for employees with and without disabilities.




                                               80


--- PAGE BREAK ---

                                                   Fisher & Connelly, Utility Analysis Methodology
                                                                         CJDS 10.1 (January 2021)

Table 5: Net Value for Employees with and without Disabilities

                         Average        Adjusted                                          Adjusted
                                                          Average       Average net
                         service         average                                         average net
                                                        service costs     value
                          value       service value                                         value
 Employees with
                         $34,524         $44,329          $22,380         $12,144         $21,949
 disabilities
 Employees
                         $44,347         $39,537          $33,071         $11,276          $6,466
 without disabilities

Note: Adjusted service value and adjusted net value include adjustments to service value based
on the relative monetary value of higher or lower performance.



Discussion

This case study demonstrates use of a methodology to analyze the relative costs and financial

benefits of employing workers with disabilities. We show that in one organization employing

people with disabilities, there is evidence of positive financial impact primarily due to above

average performance and lower turnover. The workers with disabilities exhibited higher net

value on average than the workers without disabilities, in contrast with expectations of managers

as expressed in the literature (Scott et al., 2017). Results of this analysis could be used as

evidence to suggest to managers that hiring people with disabilities, as long as they are qualified

to perform the job, is likely to have benefits for the organization. Accumulating evidence of this

type may make it easier for people with disabilities to find and maintain employment.

       It is important to recognize that these results may be different in other organizations

depending on a number of factors. Workers in our case study received few employment benefits,

which is typical for the hospitality service industry. As a result, the service costs were lower for

all workers, not just those with disabilities, but these lower costs may have resulted in higher net

value than we might see in other organizations. The workers with disabilities in this sample also

required no expensive accommodations. The HRM literature consistently reports that most


                                                   81


--- PAGE BREAK ---

                                                 Fisher & Connelly, Utility Analysis Methodology
                                                                       CJDS 10.1 (January 2021)

accommodations are either zero or quite small, with managers reporting upfront costs of less

than $500 in nearly 60% of cases (Schur et al., 2014), with on-going accommodation costs being

much lower. Higher accommodation costs could reduce the net value of workers with

disabilities, although employees receiving accommodation tend to have more positive attitudes

toward the organization and are less likely to turnover (Schur et al., 2014) suggesting that

accommodations may pay for themselves over time. Other accommodations may have been

unreported, although this can be the case with employees both with and without disabilities. For

example, employees may receive accommodations in work scheduling to allow employees

flexibility for family needs such as taking care of children or elderly parents. There are typically

no direct costs for such accommodations but any indirect costs that may be incurred for such

schedule changes are not accounted for in our analysis. Further, the financial costs for absences

in this particular job were estimated to be quite low, equivalent to having an employee report to

work late. Workers without disabilities had over twice as many absences as workers with

disabilities (6.5 absences per year compared to 3.0). In organizations or jobs where overtime or

temporary worker costs would be incurred due to an absence, the costs associated with absences

would have a larger impact on the results.

       The accuracy of performance evaluation data will also impact the analysis. Given that

many managers have pessimistic expectations about the abilities of workers with disabilities

(Stone & Colella, 1996), performance evaluations could be negatively biased and erroneously

suggest that service value is low. Research suggests that workers with and without disabilities

tend to have comparable performance ratings in many jobs. For example, a study by Lee and

Newman (1995) found that HR managers who had accommodated needs of workers with

disabilities rated their performance as average, above average, or excellent, in 72% of cases.




                                                 82


--- PAGE BREAK ---

                                                  Fisher & Connelly, Utility Analysis Methodology
                                                                        CJDS 10.1 (January 2021)

Similarly, Kaletta et al. (2012) found that workers with and without disabilities had comparable

performance in 18 of 31 locations; where differences in productivity were found, workers with

disabilities were more productive in 10 locations, and non-disabled employees were more

productive in the remaining three. There is also some evidence that ratings for workers with

disabilities may be somewhat inflated (Miller & Werner, 2005) as supervisors can be more

lenient in ratings of workers with disabilities. Inaccuracy of performance ratings in either

direction (inflation or deflation) would make the utility analysis results less accurate. We do find

in this dataset a small negative correlation between employee absences and performance ratings

(-.18, ns) and between lateness and performance ratings (-.19, ns). This increases our confidence

that the performance ratings here are based on some objective data rather than disability-related

bias, suggesting that supervisors considered these counterproductive behaviors when making

performance ratings, or the absences and latenesses are related to other aspects of performance.

       From a practical point of view, we do caution managers and rehabilitation professionals

to interpret and implement the results of this technique with care. Utility analysis can be a

powerful tool, but as with any other analytic technique it is only as good as the input data (e.g.,

Klaas & McClendon, 1996). We have worked with organizations that do not have all of the

necessary data to conduct the analysis, and in these cases have advised they not conduct the

analysis at all rather than conducting it with missing values (e.g., incomplete records of which

employees have disabilities, no performance appraisal data). We have also worked with other

organizations that have inconsistent data across different organizational units. For example, one

organization that wanted to conduct the utility analysis had slightly different performance

evaluation systems (e.g., a 5-point rating scale vs. a 7-point rating scale) for different work units.




                                                  83


--- PAGE BREAK ---

                                                 Fisher & Connelly, Utility Analysis Methodology
                                                                       CJDS 10.1 (January 2021)

This required a statistical conversion procedure to allow direct comparison among the different

units.

         The example that we have shown here demonstrated that workers with disabilities

provided net cost savings to the organization that employed them. However, the question

remains: if a cost-benefit analysis demonstrates a net cost increase for workers with disabilities,

how should the organization proceed? We would argue that the workers with disabilities should

not be fired; rather the organization should investigate the underlying causes for the disparity and

proceed accordingly. For example, if the workers with disabilities have lower performance than

their non-disabled counterparts, the manager should consider if the employees may require

accommodations that would enable them to perform at a higher level (e.g., a better chair to

prevent back pain, scheduling changes to avoid fatigue or to attend medical appointments).

Likewise, the manager should consider if any of his or her own actions are exacerbating the

problem (e.g., low expectations that are then fulfilled, training opportunities that are only

available to some employees) and if these can be adjusted. Conversely, if the net costs from

hiring workers with disabilities are accrued from higher accommodation costs, perhaps these can

be reduced (e.g., government subsidies could be considered, one-time expenses should be

depreciated over the tenure of the employee).

         We acknowledge several limitations of our study. Our data were from a single

department of one organization and there was a small number of workers with disabilities

represented in this department. This limits the generalizability of our results. We also have only

estimates of the cost of certain parameters such as injuries and absences, and we used a generic

multiplier for determining financial value of performance. It would be interesting to determine if

the service value would differ by job or by industry, similar to how Tracey and Hinkin (2008)




                                                 84


--- PAGE BREAK ---

                                                 Fisher & Connelly, Utility Analysis Methodology
                                                                       CJDS 10.1 (January 2021)

suggested that turnover costs would be lower for low complexity jobs. We did run the model

with the lower turnover costs suggested by Tracey and Hinkin for hospitality industry jobs and

found the same pattern of results, although the difference in net service value between employees

with and without disabilities was smaller. Similarly, the salary multiplier was developed many

years ago (published in 1983) and assumptions about productivity may have changed in the

intervening years. Further, the type of organization studied, where workers with disabilities were

performing the same jobs as the non-disabled employees, does not generalize to the employment

situation of all people with disabilities. We recognize that some people with disabilities find

employment through community organizations where they are provided with extra supports, are

largely separated from and perform different tasks than non-disabled employees, and may be

supervised by non-organizational members (Modini et al., 2016). While supported employment

is an effective strategy for some people with disabilities, job duties and performance conditions

must be comparable in order to conduct a rigorous utility analysis.

       In conclusion, this case study illustrates a technique that companies can use to analyze

the financial impact of hiring people with disabilities into jobs and work units that also include

people without disabilities. The utility analysis approach can help overcome biases managers

may have about the relative contribution of people with disabilities in the workplace. The

business case can be an important part of an organization’s total decision-making process,

including community integration and corporate social responsibility, about appropriate hiring of

people with disabilities.


Acknowledgments

This work was supported by a Partnership Grant from the Social Sciences and Humanities
Research Council of Canada (grant number 895-2013-1021) for the Canadian Disability
Participation Project (www.cdpp.ca).


                                                 85


--- PAGE BREAK ---

                                                Fisher & Connelly, Utility Analysis Methodology
                                                                      CJDS 10.1 (January 2021)

References

Ali, M., Schur, L., & Blanck, P. (2011). What types of jobs do people with disabilities want?
       Journal of Occupational Rehabilitation, 21(2), 199–210.

Allen, D. G. (2008). Retaining talent: A guide to analyzing and managing employee turnover.
       Society for Human Resource Management Foundation.

Blau, P. (1964). Exchange and power in social life. Wiley.

Bonaccio, S., Connelly, C. E., Gellatly, I. R., Jetha, A., & Martin Ginis, K. A. (2020). The
      participation of people with disabilities in the workplace across the employment cycle:
      Employer concerns and research evidence. Journal of Business and Psychology, 35, 135–
      158.

Domzal, C., Houtenville, A., & Sharma, R. (2008). Survey of employer perspectives on the
     employment of people with disabilities: Technical report. Office of Disability and
     Employment Policy, U.S. Department of Labor.
     https://www.dol.gov/sites/dolgov/files/odep/research/surveyemployerperspectivesemploy
     mentpeopledisabilities.pdf.

Faley, R. H., Knapp, D. E., Kustis, G. A., & Dubois, C. L. (1999). Estimating the organizational
       costs of s academy management discoveries exual harassment: The case of the US
       Army. Journal of Business and Psychology, 13(4), 461–484.

Fisher, S. L., & Connelly, C. E. (2017). Lower cost or just lower value? Modeling the
        organizational costs and benefits of contingent work. Academy of Management
        Discoveries, 3(2), 165–186.

Graby, S. (2015). Access to work or liberation from work? Disabled people, autonomy, and post-
       work politics. Canadian Journal of Disability Studies, 4(2), 132–160.

Griffeth, R., Witt, L. A., Polk, C., Robinson, S., Thacker, R., & Callison, K. (2011). Assessing
      the cost of underperformance: A computer programmer example. The Industrial-
      Organizational Psychologist, 48(4), 13–19.

Hillmer, S., Hillmer, B., & McRoberts, G. (2004). The real costs of turnover: Lessons from a call
     center. Human Resource Planning, 27(3), 34–41.

Houtenville, A. & Boege, S. (2019). Annual report on people with disabilities in America: 2018.
     University of New Hampshire, Institute on Disability.

Kaletta, J. P., Binks, D. J., & Robinson, R. (2012). Creating an inclusive workplace: Integrating
      employees with disabilities into a distribution center environment. Professional Safety:
      Journal of the American Society of Safety Engineers, 57(6), 62–71.



                                                86


--- PAGE BREAK ---

                                                Fisher & Connelly, Utility Analysis Methodology
                                                                      CJDS 10.1 (January 2021)

Kaye, H. S., Jans, L. H., & Jones, E. C. (2011). Why don’t employers hire and retain workers
     with disabilities? Journal of Occupational Rehabilitation, 21(4), 526–536.

Klaas, B. S., & McClendon, J. A. (1996). To lead, lag, or match: Estimating the financial impact
     of pay level policies. Personnel Psychology, 49(1), 121–141.

Lastuka, A., & Cottingham, M. (2016). The effect of adaptive sports on employment among
     people with disabilities. Disability and Rehabilitation, 38(8), 742–748.

Lee, B. A. & Newman, K. A. (1995). Employer responses to disability: Preliminary evidence and
      a research agenda. Employee Responsibilities and Rights Journal, 8(3), 209–229.

Lengnick-Hall, M. L., Gaunt, P. M., & Kulkarni, M. (2008). Overlooked and underutilized:
     People with disabilities are an untapped human resource. Human Resource Management,
     47(2), 255–273.

Lindsay, S., Hartman, L. R., & Fellin, M. (2016). A systematic review of mentorship programs
     to facilitate transition to post-secondary education and employment for youth and young
     adults with disabilities. Disability and Rehabilitation, 38(14), 1329–1349.

Mavranezouli, I., Megnin-Viggars, O., Cheema, N., Howlin, P., Baron-Cohen, S., & Pilling, S.
    (2014). The cost-effectiveness of supported employment for adults with autism in the
    United Kingdom. Autism, 18(8), 975–984.

Miller, B. K., & Werner, S. (2005). Factors influencing the inflation of task performance ratings
      for workers with disabilities and contextual performance ratings for their coworkers.
      Human Performance, 18(3), 309–329.

Modini, M., Tan, L., Brinchmann, B., Wang, M.-J., Killackey, E., Glozier, N., Mykletun, A., &
    Harvey, S. B. (2016). Supported employment for people with severe mental illness:
    Systematic review and meta-analysis of the international evidence. The British Journal of
    Psychiatry, 209(1), 14–22.

Schmidt, F. L., & Hunter, J. E. (1983). Individual differences in productivity: An empirical test
    of estimates derived from studies of selection procedure utility. Journal of Applied
    Psychology, 68(3), 407–414.

Schur, L., Nishii, L., Adya, M., Kruse, D., Bruyère, S. M., & Blanck, P. (2014). Accommodating
     employees with and without disabilities. Human Resource Management, 53(4), 593–621.

Scott, M., Jacob, A., Hendrie, D., Parsons, R., Girdler, S., Falkmer, T., & Falkmer, M. (2017).
        Employers’ perception of the costs and the benefits of hiring individuals with autism
        spectrum disorder in open employment in Australia. PLoS ONE, 12(5), e0177607.
        https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0177607




                                                87


--- PAGE BREAK ---

                                                Fisher & Connelly, Utility Analysis Methodology
                                                                      CJDS 10.1 (January 2021)

Stone, D. L., & Colella, A. (1996). A model of factors affecting the treatment of disabled
     individuals in organizations. Academy of Management Review, 21(2), 352–401.

Sturman, M. C., Trevor, C. O., Boudreau, J. W., & Gerhart, B. (2003). Is it worth it to win the
     talent war? Evaluating the utility of performance-based pay. Personnel Psychology, 56(4),
     997–1035.

Tracey, J. B., & Hinkin, T. R. (2008). Contextual factors and cost profiles associated with
     employee turnover. Cornell Hospitality Quarterly, 49(1), 12–27.




                                                88

