Journal of Applied Psychology
1994. Vol. 79. No. 3,402-411

Copyright 1994 by the American Psychological Association Inc
002I-9010/94/S3.00

Utility Analysis for the One-Cohort Selection-Retention Decision With
a Probationary Period

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

Wilfried De Corte
This article provides a method for estimating the utility of a choice between alternative predictors
for selecting a single cohort of new employees when some of these employees are later judged to
perform at an unacceptable level and are therefore dismissed at the end of the probationary period.
The method is shown to apply to both the traditional selection utility situation, in which the objective
is to obtain a fixed number of hires, and the situation in which the objective is to obtain a fixed
number of employees who successfully survive the initial probationary period. The utility estimation
method proposed applies J. W. Boudreau and C. J. Berger's (1985) conceptual model to a singlecohort probationary case and extends that model by providing an estimation method to predict the
utility of alternative predictors before selection takes place. The limitations of the proposal as well as
its relationship to recruitment and separation costs are also discussed.

In personnel selection, the concept of utility refers to the net
gain in productivity (i.e., the gain minus the costs) that results
from using a particular selection device. Brogden (1949) developed the basic equations for estimating this utility, and most of
the current research on the topic (e.g., Boudreau, 1983a; Martin & Raju, 1992; Murphy, 1986; Raju, Burke, & Normand,
1990) has been derived from his pioneering work. At present,
the most elaborated version of the classic utility model is the
external-employee-movement framework presented by Boudreau and Berger (1985) and further discussed by Boudreau
(1991). Although the framework can handle a variety of decision situations, Boudreau asserted that the required complexity
level of any utility model ultimately depends on the specific nature of the decision problem, and Boudreau and Berger
summed up the conditions that allow their proposal to be
simplified.
In the present article, I focus on one such special case of Boudreau and Berger's (hereinafter referred to as B & B) model.
More specifically, the proposed formulation addresses the
choice among alternative predictors for selecting a single cohort
of new employees when some of these employees are later
judged to perform at an unacceptable level and are therefore
dismissed at the end of the training and probationary period.
For further reference, this situation is hereinafter referred to as
selection with a probationary period (at probationary selection
for short), and the new model can be regarded as an alternative

statement of the B & B one-cohort selection-retention model,
in which it is assumed that (a) dismissal is the only form of
separation and (b) the retention-decision variable (i.e., job performance rating) correlates with the selection predictor.
Although the new selection-retention model is less general
than the external-employee-movement approach, it still offers a
significant contribution to the existing utility literature because
it overcomes a limitation of the B & B proposal. The limitation
relates to the estimation procedure that B & B proposed to predict the value of some of the crucial utility parameters. Although the B & B model offers a conceptually adequate framework to study the probationary selection problem, I show in the
next section that their estimation procedure cannot be applied
in the present context because of the correlation between the
selection variable and the retention-decision variable.
Besides providing a solution to the parameter estimation
problem, the present proposal also meets the criteria of theoretical and practical relevance discussed by Boudreau (1991). The
theoretical importance of the new model derives from the fact
that the proposal integrates the former Taylor-Russell approach
(Taylor & Russell, 1939) with the standard Brogden-CronbachGleser (BCG) formulation (Brogden, 1949; Cronbach &
Gleser, 1965). The practical value is linked to two observations.
First, the model relates to a typical decision situation in that
misselection and the subsequent dismissal of unsatisfactory employees is a fact of life in selection: Many new employees are
first hired on a probationary basis, and only at the end of this
period is it decided (usually on the basis of observed job
performance) whether they will remain on the job (Brewster,
Hegewisch, Holden, & Lockhart, 1992). Second, the proposed
model can be applied to another important selection situation
that also cannot be dealt with in the B & B and BCG frameworks. More specifically, the model can be extended to estimate
the utility of a predictor when, at the end of the probationary
period, a fixed quota of successfully performing selectees is
needed. As observed by one of the reviewers for this article, the
latter selection situation may be even more realistic than the
traditional fixed-quota-of-selectees decision.

I thank William Whitely and two particularly helpful anonymous reviewers for their useful comments on a draft of the article.
A computer program (written in FORTRAN 77) that performs the
utility calculations described in this article is available on request. Because the program calls routines from the Numerical Algorithms
Group library, interested readers should first check whether they have
this library (or a similar one) at their disposal.
Correspondence concerning this article should be addressed to Wilfried De Corte, Department of Work and Organizational Psychology,
Ghent University, H. Dunantlaan 2, B-9000 Ghent, Belgium.
402

ONE-COHORT SELECTION-RETENTION UTILITY ANALYSIS

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

Fixed-Quota Selection With a Probationary Period
In the fixed-quota probationary selection condition, the new
selection-retention model estimates the utility of a predictor
when a given number (N) of employees must be hired from
an applicant pool of a fixed number of candidates («) with the
understanding that the unsuccessful selectees will be dismissed
after the probationary period, whereas the successful employees
will remain on the job. Whether a selectee is considered successful or not depends only on his or her performance rating at the
end of the probation period. Therefore, performance rating is
the retention-decision variable (cf. the variable q in the B &
B model, 1985, p. 590) and, assuming top-down selection, the
selectees have a predictor score (X) that is at least equal to xc —
the predictor cutoff score that corresponds to the selection ratio
N/n —whereas the successful selectees are characterized by a
performance rating R at least equal to rc, the critical criterion
rating. Equating the duration of one time period with the time
spent on the job by the unsuccessful selectees (i.e., the length of
the trial period, excluding the training time), the net utility of
the predictor-selected workforce (t/ p ) can then be written as
follows:

-ATC t -«Cp, (1)

where T is the average number of time periods on the job for the
successful selectees; Sp is the success ratio of the predictor (i.e.,
Sp indicates the proportion of selectees whose performance rating at the end of the trial period is at least equal to rc ) ; F denotes
the dollar- valued payoff of job performance; Mr<xc) represents
the average payoff of all the selectees; Mr(V(.) expresses the average payoff of the successful selectees; MS refers to the average
service cost (i.e., salary and costs other than compensation) associated with the job performance; Cp indicates the cost per candidate of using the predictor; and C, is the training cost per hire.
Apart from the omission of the separation cost, which will be
included at a later stage, the definition of Up in Equation 1 is a
faithful reflection of the conceptualization proposed by Boudreau and Berger ( 1985, p. 584) in their Figure 1. More specifically, the first term of the equation represents the utility of
the new cohort of selectees (cf. the additions in Boudreau &
Berger's, 1985, terminology) for Time Period 1, whereas the
transaction costs of the acquisitions are summarized by the last
two terms. Finally, the utility of the retained part of the cohort,
over the periods 2 to T, is given by the second term of the formula, which ( as indicated by Boudreau & Berger, 1985) consists
of the product of (a) the average length of stay on the job (after
the trial period) of the retained selectees, (b) the quantity of
retentions (i.e., the product NSP ) , and ( c ) the quality minus the
performance cost (the term MJ-OVJ - MS) of these retained
employees.
Like all utility expressions, the formulation of Equation 1
makes several simplifying assumptions ( cf. Boudreau, 1 99 1 ). It
is assumed that both the mean service cost (MS) and the training
investment (C,) are the same for successful and unsuccessful
employees. In addition, it is also assumed that the mean service
cost and the mean payoff, HY^J, do not change over time; but
the eventual time dependency of both parameters can be ac-

403

counted for if their value at time / + 1 is a simple function of
the corresponding quantities at time t. Finally, the model does
not provide for the impact of financial and economic correction
parameters, such as variable cost, taxes, and discounting (cf.
Boudreau, 1983a). These parameters could easily be included
in the present model, however, and their inclusion would have
the effect of reducing the utility values reported here. They have
been omitted simply to focus on the main tenet of the proposal.

Utility Estimation Problem
For Utility Equation 1 to be of any real practical value as
a decision aid in choosing between alternative predictors, one
should be able to estimate its value before the selection is actually performed. Thus, besides values for the usual parameters—
T, Cp, and Myoxj—advance estimates of Sp, My<Vc>, Q, and MS
are also needed. The latter two parameters pose no major estimation problems, however, because Boudreau and Berger
(1985) offered several adequate suggestions to determine MS and
referred to the human resource accounting literature to evaluate Ct.
To determine the remaining two quantities—Sp and HY^C)—
one might consider another proposal by Boudreau and Berger
(1985). More specifically, these authors suggested the use of
concurrent or past empirical data to estimate the number N( 1
— Sp) of separations (A^, in their notation) and the difference
in average quality between the retained and the preseparation
workforce (the difference [Mr(xcrc) ~ Mr(xc)] in the present
article), where the latter difference would be obtained as the
product of (a) the average standardized score of the retained
group on the retention-decision variable (Zqr, in Boudreau and
Berger's notation), (b) the correlation between this variable
and dollar-valued payoff in the group of selectees (r,,OT), and (c)
the value of a one-standard-deviation difference in payoff in the
selected cohort (SD^; cf. Boudreau & Berger, 1985, pp. 591,596).
Unfortunately, the B & B model cannot be applied in the
present context of selection with a probation period because the
situation is characterized by a substantial correlation between
the selection-decision and the retention-decision variables. In
fact, this correlation (i.e., between performance rating and predictor scores) is often used as a proxy for the correlation between the selection predictor and the dollar-valued performance
(cf. Raju et al., 1990), and, because of this association, past
empirical records will typically produce wrong estimates of all
four quantities: Nt, Zqr, rQiSV, and S7)m.. Only data that relate
to a predictor with the same validity and that are used with an
identical selection ratio will not lead to such biased estimates.
But it is most unlikely for both conditions to hold simultaneously, especially when the selection decision, as is typically
the case, involves the introduction of a new predictor. Finally,
using current empirical data is no solution either because the
present objective is to predict the utility of selection devices that
have not yet been applied in a particular situation to decide
between the alternative possibilities.
Alternative Utility Model

To overcome the estimation difficulties described above, I
propose a new utility model. The model, which integrates the

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

404

WILFRIED DE CORTE

earlier Taylor-Russell framework with the classic BCG approach, is based on two assumptions. First, it is assumed that,
after standardization, the observed predictor scores (X) and the
observed performance ratings (R) are jointly distributed in the
applicant population according to the bivariate standard normal density, with pXR the correlation between X and R. This
assumption is identical to the one that Taylor and Russell
(1939) introduced to estimate the success ratio of a selection,
and I discuss its justification at length in the closing section of
this article.
The second assumption asserts that the regression of dollarvalued payoff of performance ( Y ) on performance rating (R) is
linear: E( Y \ R = r) = HY + PYR^Y^', with My and aY the mean
and the standard deviation (over one time period) of Fin the
applicant population, respectively, and with PYR the correlation
between Y and R. Although the assumption is essentially similar to the one proposed by Boudreau and Berger in their discussion of nonrandom retentions (cf. Boudreau & Berger, 1985, pp.
590-591), it should be noted that the linearity of the regression
is presumed for the applicant population, because this feature
makes it possible to estimate the newly introduced correlation
parameter pYK by using the procedure suggested by Hsu (1982),
in which R is considered as an alternative predictor.1
Given the previous two assumptions, the new utility model
no longer requires the type of empirical data proposed by Boudreau and Berger to estimate the success ratio (Sv) and the average quality of the retained (successful) selectees, Mytv,.)More specifically, it follows from the first assumption that the
success ratio of the predictor is equal to ^(xc, rc)/$i(xc),
where $2(-, •) and <J>i(-) refer to the bivariate and univariate
standard normal distributions,2 respectively. In turn, the second assumption implies that the average quality of the retained
selectees is obtained as
j,

(2)

with M«<xcrc) the mean performance rating of the successful selectees. A similar equation relates My(;tc) to MJ?(JCC)> the mean performance rating of all selectees.
The bivariate assumption also provides an analytic expression for the average rating scores because Muthen (1990) and
Tallis (1961) have shown that

c, rc),

(3)

where 0i(a) denotes the univariate normal density function,
and the shorter notation, p, is used to indicate the correlation
PXR. Finally, M/?<XC) equals PM*<XC)> whereas the mean predictor
score of the selectees, MA-<*C>> equals <M-*c)/*i(*c) because the
bivariate assumption implies that the regression of R on X is
linear and that the marginal distributions ofR and X are both
normal.
Thus, in comparison with the BCG approach and except for
the already discussed quantities PYR, MS, and C,, the application
of the new utility model requires the specification of only two
additional parameters. The evaluation of the first of these new
parameters, fiy, is, however, part of the judgmental procedure

to estimate <j> described by Schmidt, Hunter, McKenzie, and
Muldrow (1979). Moreover, in a recent study, Judiesch,
Schmidt, and Mount (1992) concluded that "under most conditions, a reasonable estimate of Y . . . can be computed" (p.
248).
Finally, the specification of the performance cutoff is basically similar to the determination of xc because the values of
both parameters are the result of managerial decisions that define the characteristics of the utility problem. The meaning of
being a successful performer is something for the organization
to decide, and the present model allows the translation of this
decision in terms of meaningful economic utility parameters.
From the assumption that the regression of dollar- valued payoff
on observed performance is linear, it follows that rc can be expressed as rc = [E(Y\R = rc) - HY]/(PYROY)- So, if the organization decides that a successful employee must contribute, for
example, at least as much as his or her service cost— that is, it is
decided that E( Y \ R = rc) should be equal to MS— then rc is chosen equal to (MS - My)/(pra">). Alternatively, management
might decide that to be successful a selectee must perform as
well as the average of the present, tenured employees (Mr,); in
this case, rc would equal (My, — Mr)/(Pra°>) and so on. Also,
observe that the decided criterion cutoff value can easily be implemented at the end of the probationary period because the
present assumptions imply that the successful employees can
be identified by simply ranking the selectees according to their
performance ratings. The top percentage of the thus-ranked performers (Sp X 100) then corresponds to the percentage of successful selectees.

Predictor Utility
As noted above, Equation 1 indicates the utility of the predictor-selected workforce and not the utility of using the predictor. To obtain the latter type of utility estimate, 'it is common
practice to calculate A(7 defined as the difference between Up
and l/o , the net utility of a randomly selected workforce. Following the same logic as before, this random utility can be written as
I/o = N[»Y - Ms] + ( T- 1 )AW 0 [My<r c ) - Ms]

(4)

where S0 = $\ (rc) is the success ratio of a random selection and
My<rc) corresponds to the mean payoff of the randomly selected
successful selectees. This average can be computed as My<r c ) = My
+ py/jOYM/jog, with the mean performance rating of the randomly successful selectees, M*(rc) , equal to 0 1 ( rc ) / 4> i ( rc ) .
1

To apply the procedure of Hsu (1982), the two basic assumptions
of the present model must be combined with the assumption that the
regression of Y on X is linear (this is the basic assumption in the Brogden-Cronbach-Gleser model (Brogden, 1949; Cronbach & Gleser,
1965) and that the pairs Y, R and Y, X have a bivariate exponential type
of distribution.
2
More specifically, *2(xc, rc) is denned as /*" /*" <t>2(X, R)dRdX,
whereas *i(xc) is equal to /*°° <t>,(X)dX, with <fe(a, b) and 0,(a) the
bivariate and univariate standard normal densities, respectively.

ONE-COHORT SELECTION-RETENTION UTILITY ANALYSIS
Subtracting U0 from t/p and rearranging terms then leads to
the following expression for the predictor utility:
AC/

- U0 =

p.

(5)

From the equation, it can be seen that the parameters required
to evaluate t/p also suffice to estimate At/.

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

Relationship to the BCG Utility Model
The classic BCG framework does not distinguish between
successful and unsuccessful selectees. As a consequence, the
framework cannot be applied to the present problem of selection with a probationary period. The relationship between the
BCG and the new selection-retention model is straightforward,
however, in that the latter formulation of the utility of a predictor-selected workforce essentially differs from the classic proposal in only two respects. First, the total of all selectees, N,
is divided into the numbers SfN and ( 1 — SP)N of successful
(retained) and unsuccessful (dismissed) hires, respectively, and
the expected length of stay is adjusted accordingly. Successful
selectees are expected to remain T time periods on the job,
whereas the unsuccessful selectees are fired after one time period. Second, the expected payoff is also differentiated: During
the first period, the same payoff, Mxtxj, is used as in the BCG
approach, whereas in the following periods the payoff My(xcrc) is
introduced.
The analysis outlined above shows that the present selectionretention model becomes equivalent to the BCG formulation
only if one assumes that all selected individuals remain with the
organization for the full duration of the Ttime periods. Because
this assumption does not hold in many practical selection decisions (and certainly not in the present, probationary selection
situation), it follows that utility models that incorporate employee separation — such as the B & B model and the present
elaboration of this framework — are generally to be preferred.

Fixed Quota of Successful Selectees
The situation addressed here differs from the traditional
fixed-quota selection problem in that the quota is not in terms
of people to be hired but in terms of successful selectees (cf.
Kao & Rowan, 1959). Thus, as is often the case in practical
situations, the organization needs to add a fixed number (N) of
successful employees to the workforce; and the problem is to
predict the utility of using a predictor to perform the selection,
again with the understanding that the unsatisfactorily performing employees will be dismissed at the end of the probationary
period. As before, the utility of the predictor is obtained by
comparing t/p, the utility of the predictor-selected workforce
(cf. Equation 1 ), with t/0, the utility of a randomly hired group
of employees (cf. Equation 4), but this time the computation
of both Up and U0 is complicated by the requirement that AT
successful employees must ultimately be added to the workforce
after selection and separations occur.
A different number of people must be hired to satisfy the requirement, depending on whether the predictor is used or not.

405

More specifically, the pair of assumptions introduced earlier
implies that the number of predictor-selected employees, N f ,
should equal N/Sp, whereas N0 —the number of randomly selected hires— must equal N/S0. Replacing the number of selectees with Nf and N0 in Equations 1 and 4, respectively; rewriting both NfSp and N0S0 as N; and subtracting the thusmodified formula for U0 from the equally updated expression
for Up, it follows that the utility of the predictor, At/, is

At/ - Up - U0 =
(6)

where the predictor cutoff (xc) is the solution of 4>2(xc, rc) = N/
n, provided that n ss A7*i(r c ). For, if the latter condition is
not fulfilled, then it is impossible to obtain at least N successful
selectees.
For the fixed-quota-of-selectees problem, it has been shown
that the BCG framework and the present proposal can be made
equivalent by recognizing that BCG assumes that all employees
are treated as successful and that all have average tenure of T
periods. The BCG model treats the fixed-quota-of-selectees
problem and the fixed-quota-of-successful-hires problem precisely the same, whereas the present procedure recognizes that
they are different. The B & B model can encompass the fixedquota-of-hires problem, but, as noted above, the suggested estimation approach of the B & B model is likely to be inaccurate
for the probationary selection situation. Thus, the proposed estimation approach improves on the BCG model by recognizing
the difference between the two problems, and it provides a
method for estimating parameters necessary to apply the B & B
conceptualization to the probationary situation. Also, it seems
likely that many organizations define their selection goal as filling a number of vacancies with acceptable employees, rather
than simply hiring that number of new employees (Milkovich
& Boudreau, 1 99 1 ) . Thus, the present proposal is both theoretically and practically interesting.
To further strengthen the relevance of the new selection-retention utility analysis, I show in the next section how two additional decision parameters can be integrated into the framework. These new parameters are the cost associated with firing
an unsuccessful selectee (Cs; cf. the separation cost discussed
by Boudreau & Berger, 1 985 ) and the recruitment expenses.

Separation and Recruitment Costs
The separation costs are easily accounted for. In case the organization needs A7 successful selectees, (Nf — N) predictor-selected employees will have to be fired after the first time period,
whereas the number of dismissals will equal (N0 - N) when the
selection is performed randomly. Thus, to adjust the predictor
utility for the separation costs, the term (Np — N0)CS must be
subtracted from the right-hand side of Equation 6. Because Np
will be smaller than N0 when a valid predictor is used, this will
always result in a higher value of A U. On the other hand, when
the decision situation corresponds to the common fixed-quota
selection scenario, the quantities N( 1 - Sp ) Cs and N(l-So)C,
must be subtracted from the right-hand side of Equations 1 and
4, respectively, and the predictor utility, corrected for separation

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

406

WILFRIED DE CORTE

costs, is obtained by adding the term N(SP - S0)CS to the expression for A {/in Equation 5.
To assess the impact of the recruitment cost, one can adopt
a procedure similar to the one described by Martin and Raju
( 1992). That is, if n is the number of applicants and Cr(n) represents the average recruitment cost per applicant, then the utility of the predictor-selected workforce — adjusted for the recruitment expenses— is found by subtracting the quantity
«Cr(w) from the utility Up. Also, observe that the notation C r(n)
clearly indicates that the average recruitment cost is conceived
as a function of the number of recruited applicants (cf. Martin
&Raju, 1992).
The same recruitment cost does not apply to the randomly
selected workforce, however. Assuming—as the majority of the
utility models do (Boudreau, 1991; Martin & Raju, 1992)—
that the characteristics of the applicant pool (i.e., the value of
Mr and ay) are independent of the size of the pool, it follows that
the utility of the randomly selected employees is not related to
the selection ratio. Hence, the recruitment cost in random selection must be based on the number of selectees, which means
that this cost is equal to NCr(N) for the fixed-quota selection
decision and equal to N0Cr(N0) when N successful selectees are
needed. Furthermore, the assumption implies that the predictor
utility is almost always inflated when the recruitment cost is not
accounted for, regardless of whether unsuccessful selectees are
dismissed or not. That is, the utility of a valid predictor is typically bought at the expense of a higher recruitment cost because
such a predictor is useful only when more people than needed
are recruited. The only exception to this occurs when the total
recruitment cost does not depend on the number of recruitments. Although rare, this may happen when, for example, an
organization has a sufficient number of spontaneous walk-ins.
To summarize, the utility of the predictor, corrected for both
the recruitment and separation costs, is equal to
At/ =

N(SP -

(So -

(7)

in the common fixed-quota selection situation. Alternatively,
when the quota relates to N successful selectees, the corrected
predictor utility is
At/ =
(8)

Observe that Equations 7 and 8 both reduce to the classic utility
formula (adjusted for training, separation, and recruitment
costs) when it is assumed that all selectees are successful.
Illustrative Application
The purpose of the following example is to illustrate the
utility equations derived above and to clarify some of the computational aspects of the formulas. The example is based on
data gathered during a workshop on utility held by the selection
division of the Belgian Association of Work and Organizational
Psychology. As a preparatory step, the participants—all of
whom had several years of experience in recruitment and selec-

Table 1
Selection Decision Parameters for the Illustrative Application
Parameter description
No. of applicants
No. of selectees
Average tenure (time periods) for
successful selectees"
Predictor validity (predictor-observed
performance r)
Correlation between money-valued
payoff (Y) and observed (rated)
performance (ft)
Predictor cost per applicant
Training cost per selectee
Average payoff of job performance (one
time period) in the applicant
population
SD
Average service cost per employee
Separation cost per unsuccessful
employee
Recruitment cost per applicant
Random selection11
Predictor selection

Notation

Value

n
N

136
17

T

11

pXR or p

0.35

PYR
Cp
C,

0.85
$200
$10,000

My
aY
MS

$25,000
$7,000
$22,500

Cs

$1,000

QNo)
QB)

$100
$400

" Average tenure for unsuccessful selectees was one time period.
b
Fixed-quota-of-successful-selectees condition.

tion—were asked to summarize a number of firm-specific
utility figures with regard to the hiring of recently graduated
university students for an entry-level management position. In
what follows, only the data related to the selection of junior
managers in the financial sector are used to construct a typical
selection scenario for this position.
Table 1 shows a complete overview of the parameters and the
parameter values of the scenario. From the table, it can be seen
that the situation refers to the selection of 17 selectees from a
total of 136 applicants, using a predictor (a general ability test)
with validity PXR equal to 0.35 and assuming a correlation pra
of 0.85 between observed performance and the dollar value of
that performance. First, the utility of the predictor-selected
workforce (t/ p ) and the utility of using the predictor (At/) are
calculated when a fixed quota of 17 graduates is hired on a probationary basis. Next, these quantities are computed for the
case that 17 successful selectees are needed at the end of the trial
period.
Traditional Fixed-Quota Selection Situation
The data in Table 1 indicate that the selection ratio, 4>, (xc), is
17 /136 = 0.125 in the fixed-quota situation. Hence, the critical
predictor score, xc, equals 1.150.3 As to the value of the crite3

All computations were performed in double precision, and the reported values are accurate to the nearest third decimal or the nearest
integer. Because of the truncation, some results may be slightly different
from those obtained by straight calculation. For example, MXO.ISO, -0.4201
is in fact equal to 0.8315061 and nrii.iso.-OAW = $29,947.46. Hence,
the value of Mro.i so.-0.4201'« reported as 29,947, whereas the straight

ONE-COHORT SELECTION-RETENTION UTILITY ANALYSIS

407

Table 2
Calculation of the Average Performance Payoff Predictor and Randomly Selected Workforce
Quantity

Value

Computational formula
2

MR< 1.1 50, -0.420)

M« I . I 50. -0.420)
MW.150)
M*(I.150)

Mm. 150)

(<*>,(-0.42) X <*>, f f( 1 . 1 5 - 0.35 X -0.42)]/Vl -0.35 } +
0.35 X <h(1.15) X $,[(-0.42 - 0.35 X 1.15)/Vl - 0.352])/
*2(1.15,-0.42)
25,000 + 0.85 X 7,000 X 0.832
0,(1.150)/*,(1.150)
0.35X1.647
25,000 + 0.85 X 7,000 X 0.576

0.832
29,947
1.647
0.576
28,430

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

Calculation of So and /iy(-0.4201

Mlf-0.420)

<t>,(-0.420)
0,(-0.420)/*i(-0.420)
25,000 + 0.85 X 7,000 X 0.551

rion cutoff ( r c ) it is decided that a selectee is successful when his
or her expected payoff is at least equal to the expected service
cost. So, rc can be computed as (22,500 - 25,000)7(7,000 X
0.85) = —0.420. Using this value and the value of xc, one can
calculate the success ratio of the predictor (Sp) as $2( 1.150,
-0.420)/$,( 1.150) = 0.853.
To determine the utility of the predictor-selected workforce
(Up; see Equation 1), the values of//y(1.15o,-o.420) and My(i.iso)
are also required. The calculations that lead to the determination of both these quantities are summarized in the first part of
Table 2. The first column of the table indicates the quantity that
is to be computed, the second column gives the computational
formula, and the final column contains the resulting value. To
evaluate the expressions $ t (a) and 4>2(a, b), which occur in
some of the calculations, routines from the Numerical Algorithms Group FORTRAN library (Numerical Algorithms
Group [ NAG ], 1990) are used. As a final result, it is found that
HY( 1.150.-0.420) = $29,947 and that /»x { ,., 5 o> = $28,430. So, the
utility of the predictor-selected workforce, uncorrected for separation and recruitment costs, is equal to (see Equation 1)

0.663
0.551
28,279

utility is essentially derived from three sources. First, the average quality of the predictor-based hires exceeds that of the randomly selected employees; that is, compare the average, HY^J,
of $28,430 to tiY ~ $25,000. Second, using the predictor also
results in a higher average quality of the retained selectees; compare Mrcvj = $29,947 to /ty<rc> = $28,279. Finally, a larger
quantity of employees is retained when the selection is based on
the predictor (i.e., compare 17 X 0.853 = 14.501 to 17 X 0.663
= 11.271).
Although the first two of these utility components are selfevident, one might object to the last component because it does
not reflect the actual practice of probationary selection in organizations. According to the objection, organizations would replace the unsuccessful selectees at the end of the probationary
period with new hires until they have enough qualified people to
produce the required output. As a consequence, the difference
between the utility of a predictor-selected versus a randomly selected workforce would be substantially smaller than the one
obtained in the present proposal because of the reduced difference in the quantity of contributing employees.
This is an important objection, not because it implies that
Up = 17 X (28,430 - 22,500) + 10 X 17 X 0.853 X (29,947
the proposed calculation is incorrect but because it points
- 22,500) - 17 X 10,000 - 136 X 200 = $983,955. (9) out that the initial formulation of the utility question as a
single-cohort decision problem may sometimes be inadeIn a similar way, and by using the quantities that are tabulated
quate.
Obviously, when the selection proceeds according to
in the second half of Table 2, one can calculate the (equally
the
scenario
depicted in the objection, then the present sinuncorrected) utility of the random-selected workforce (t/ 0 ; see
gle-cohort proposal must be extended to a multiple-cohort
Equation 4):
formulation to account for the fact that the predictor will be
I/o = 17 X (25,000 - 22,500) + 10 X 17 X 0.663
used repeatedly. Such a generalization is easily achieved,
however, by adopting a procedure that is similar to the one
X (28,279 - 22,500) - 17 X 10,000 = $523,635. (10)
proposed by Boudreau (1983b).
Hence, the utility of using the predictor (AC/; see Equation 5)
Alternatively, when it is feasible to hire enough workers to
for thefixed-quotaselection amounts to 983,955 - 523,635 =
ensure that the required number of successful selectees is ob$460,320 when neither the separation nor the recruitment costs
tained at once, the objection suggests that the utility question
are accounted for.
should, right from the start, be framed as a decision related to
Inspection of Equations 9 and 10 reveals that the predictor
the hiring of a fixed quota of successful selectees. The next example shows that such a formulation is indeed possible within
the new utility model. The example deals also with the separacalculation 25,000 + 0.85 X 7,000 X 0.832 (see top of Table 2) results
tion and recruitment costs that were left unaccounted for in the
in the slightly different value of $29,950.40.
previous illustration.

408

WILFRIED DE CORTE

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

Fixed Quota of Successful Selectees
This example focuses on the utility of selecting afixednumber of 17 successful selectees from the applicant pool. To determine the predictor utility in the fixed-quota-of-successful-selectees condition, it is necessary to first know the required number of selectees: Nf (predictor selection) and N0 (random
selection). The latter number is easily obtained, however, because N0 can be calculated as AY So, where S0 depends only on
the value of rc. Applied to the present example, in which rc =
-0.420 and N = 17, this results in N0 = 17/*,(-0.420) =
25.648.
The derivation of the number Np is somewhat more difficult
in that it requires solving the following nonlinear equation in
Xc- *2(•*,:, rc) = N/n. Thus, in the example, Np= 136 X *, (xc),
where jcc is the solution of *2(xc, -0.420) = 17/136. To solve
the nonlinear equation, a routine from the NAG library (NAG,
1990) is used, which returns a value of 1.046 forx c . Hence, Np
equals 136 X $, (1.046) = 20.099.
Because the decision situation relates to the selection of exactly 17 successful selectees, the numbers N0 and Np are typically noninteger valued. To overcome this problem, the decision
objective might be rephrased to the requirement that at least
17, but less than 18, successful employees are selected. The calculations could then proceed with NO and Np equal to 26 and
21, respectively. Such rounding to the next integer will only
marginally affect the utilities U0, Up, and At/, however; they
were therefore omitted from further computations.
Given the values of xc, N0, and Np, the calculation of the
expected utility of the predictor usage (see Equation 6) poses
no other problems than those encountered in the computation
of the predictor utility for the common fixed-quota selection.
Thus, it is found that /jy< 1.045. -0.420) = $29,837 and that MX< i.o46>
= $28,253, which implies that
At/ = 20.099 X 28,253 - 25.648 X 25,000
- (20.099 - 25.648) X 22,500 + 10 X 17
X (29,837 - 28,279) - (20.099 - 25.648)
X 10,000-136X200 = $344,774. ( 1 1 )
To adjust for the separation and recruitment costs, the terms
(20.099 - 25.648) X 1,000 (Cs = $1,000, see Table 1) and 136
X400 - 25.648 X 100(C r(n) = $400andCr№o) = $100;cf. Table
1) must be subtracted from this utility value. The corrected
utility of the predictor is then estimated to be $298,487.
Comparing the present utility figure of $344,774 (i.e., the
value of At/ calculated in Equation 1 1 ) to the previously obtained estimate of $460,320, one can see that the utility of the
predictor decreases substantially when the decision problem is
framed in terms of hiring a fixed quota of successful candidates.
This is not surprising, however, because now the number of randomly selected employees that contribute to the utility in Time
Period 1 is higher than the corresponding number of predictorselected hires. Also, although it is still true that the average quality of both the initially selected and subsequently retained selectees is higher when the predictor is used, there is no difference
anymore with regard to the quantity of the retained hires.

Whether random or predictor selection is performed, enough
applicants are hired to guarantee that 17 of the selectees are
successful and, hence, are retained. Finally, both effects are not
compensated for by (a) the higher acquisition cost associated
with the random selection (i.e., 25.648 instead of 20.099 selectees must be trained in the random-selection condition) and (b)
the higher total performance cost of the random selectees during the first period.
This lack of compensation may very well generalize to situations other than the present selection situations when the average length of stay on the job for successful selectees is substantially higher than the duration of the probationary period.
Hence, the new selection-retention model may offer an additional explanation for the observation that the usual utility
models overestimate the real gain of selection (cf. Becker, 1989;
Boudreau, 1991; Murphy, 1986) because these models typically
address the utility issue in the context of the common fixedquota selection condition and not in terms of the fixed-quotaof-successful-selectees situation (cf. Boudreau, 1991, p. 698).

Discussion
I have described a new utility model for dealing with the onecohort selection-retention decision problem. Unlike the B & B
model, the new approach allows for a correlation to exist between the selection variable and the retention variable. Because
of this feature, the new estimation procedure can be used to
predict the selection utility for the one-cohort probationary period situation, under both the goal of obtaining a fixed quota of
new hires and the goal of obtaining a fixed quota of successful
employees. Hence, the new utility model conforms to the view
that utility analysis is a decision-making tool that enables industrial and organizational psychologists to anticipate the future consequences of "programs designed to enhance the value
of the work force to the employing organization" (Boudreau,
1991, p. 623).
The present proposal is not without limitations, however.
First, the model pertains to the one-cohort selection-retention
decision problem only, and even this topic is not dealt with exhaustively because certain decision parameters or outcome attributes (cf. Boudreau, 1991) are not included in the model.
Thus, the equations do not anticipate the effects of rejected job
offers on the utility of the selection. To integrate these effects, an
extension of the proposals by Hogarth and Einhorn (1976) and
by Murphy (1986) may be considered, however. In particular,
one could assume that the probability of accepting a job offer—
P(A = 1), with A the dichotomous job-acceptance variable—
can be estimated from the logistic regression of job acceptance
on X (cf. Raju, Steinhaus, Edwards, & DeLessio, 1991, who
use logistic regression to express the probability of job success):
P(A= 1) = [e ( V*. Ar )]/[i + e(*°+V>]. From the assumption it
then follows that, for example, the average payoff of the successful selectees who accept the job offer, Mytv c a>, is equal to HY +
v^), With
/»+oc p+cc

r

+

/?^o 'V

1 1 *[777v
f °° f
Ic Jrc

| e °—!—1\<t>2(X,R)dRdX
[l+eWJ

-. (12)

409

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

ONE-COHORT SELECTION-RETENTION UTILITY ANALYSIS
The other quantities in Equations 1 and 4 could be estimated in
a similar way.
Some of the practical problems related to this extension are
comparable to those that characterized Hogarth and Einhorn's
(1976) and Murphy's (1986) proposals; that is, the assumption
concerning the logistic relationship between job acceptance and
X may be erroneous, or it may be less straightforward to obtain
advance estimates of the parameters b0 and bt. Finally, the analytic formulas to compute, for example, Sp and RR(VC>> must be
replaced by the numerical evaluation of double integrals of the
type shown above for the determination of AI/J(JW,).
Another limitation of the present proposal is that no translation of the utility outcomes is given in terms of the capital
budgeting framework (cf. Cascio & Morris, 1990). Such a
translation is easily achieved, however, because it only requires
substituting the BCG type of utility values with the new estimates in the formulas presented by, among others, Boudreau
(1983a) and Cascio and Morris (1990).
A more serious problem with the new utility model relates to
the assumption that the observed predictor and criterion scores
follow a bivariate normal distribution. Even though Schmidt et
al. (1979) mentioned the studies by Tiffin and Vincent (1960)
and by Surgent (1947)—both of which substantiated the validity of the bivariate normal model to describe test-criterion sample data—the assumption may still be judged as questionable.
Remember, however, that the main purpose of the distributional
assumption is to enable the estimation of the utility before the
selection actually takes place. In this respect, Schmidt et al.
(1979) observed that "for most purposes, there is no need for
the utility estimates to be accurate down to the last dollar" (p.
617). Their second remark—that one should also consider the
alternative situation—is also relevant here because, as shown
earlier here, neither the BCG nor the B & B models offer an
adequate approach to the presently discussed selection-decision
problems.
The argumentation above is not really conclusive, however,
and I therefore decided to conceive of a generalized version of
the new selection-retention utility model. The generalization is
based on the work by Raju et al. (1990) in that a distinction is
made between true and observed predictor-criterion scores. A
full account of the extension is given in the Appendix. For present purposes, it suffices to observe that the generalization permits one to estimate the robustness of the utility outcomes for
violations of the assumption that the observed predictor and
criterion scores are bivariate normally distributed. To mimic
the level of violation, the variance of the measurement errors ex
and eR is manipulated relative to the variance of the true score
components A", and Rt. The robustness of the utility outcomes
can then be assessed by comparing the values of Up, U0, and
At/ obtained in the zero-error condition, to the corresponding
estimates in the nonzero conditions.
Table 3 shows the results of such a comparison with respect
to the Up,U0, and AC/ values that were calculated in the example given above for the common fixed-quota selection problem.
The rows of the table correspond to the ratio of the variance of
the error components (al x and a2eR, respectively) to the variance
of the true score components. (In all cases, the two error variances were assumed equal.) The columns of the table refer to

Table 3
Utility Values for the Extended Bivariate Model
Ratio a^tJa^Xi

£/„

l/o

At/

.00

983,955
983,955

523,635
523,635

460,320
460,320

.10

932,590
982,183

505,829
505,829

426,761
476,354

.30

845,419
976,790

473,886
473,886

371,533
502,904

.50

773,537
968,625

446,198
446,198

327,339
522,427

1.00

638,543
937,896

391,528
391,528

247,015
546,368

the utilities Up, C/o, and AC/, and the upper entry of each cell
indicates the value of the appropriate quantity. Although these
values indicate a steady decrease in the utilities for increasing
levels of error variance, it should be noted that the value
changes are related not only to the incremental violation of the
bivariate assumption but also to the decline of the correlation
between the observed scores. In case that, for example, <r*x/0x,
= fflg/ff^ = 0.3, it follows that the correlation between X0 and
RO decreases from .35 (i.e., the correlation in the zero-error
condition) to .35/V1.3 X 1.3 = .269. To neutralize this unwanted
effect, one can modify the extended bivariate utility model in a very
simple way. In particular, it suffices to fix the correlation of the observed scores at the initial value of .35 for each error condition by
adjusting the correlation between the true score components. With
this modification, the error conditions differ only in the form of the
observed score distribution and differ no longer in the magnitude of
the observed score correlation. This allows for a better baseline with
which to evaluate the robustness issue.
The results that correspond to the modification are also summarized in Table 3. For each error condition, the lower cell entry indicates the appropriate utility value, and by comparing these values
to the utilities of the zero-error condition one can see that the new
utility model is quite robust for mild violations of the distributional
assumption. Also, because the U0 estimates are unaffected by the
modification, whereas the Up values decrease only slowly, it follows
that the predictor utilities, AC/, increase for higher error levels. But
the overestimation is quite small when both the predictor and the
criterion are measured in a reasonably reliable way.
One final issue remains to be settled. The issue concerns the
complexity of the present utility model. More specifically, one
might ask—as Boudreau (1991) did—whether the increased
complexity is really worth it. I believe that the main arguments
in favor of such complex models, put forward by Boudreau, also
apply to the present utility framework. In addition, it should be
noted that (except for the generalized version) all of the relevant
formulas of the model have been around for at least 30 years.
Alternatively, when a highly valid predictor is available or the
predictor cutoff is highly negative, then the benefits of the more
complex framework will be rather marginal. However, in most
practical selection situations, predictors are moderately valid
and the cutoff levels are near or above the average. In such situ-

410

WILFRIED DE CORTE

ations, the estimation approach suggested here allows selection
decision makers to more accurately apply Boudreau and Berger's conceptual framework and to anticipate selection utility in
the one-cohort probationary period situation, when the selection-decision variables and retention-decision variables correlate substantially.

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

References
Becker, B. E. (1989). The influence of labor markets on human resources utility estimates. Personnel Psychology, 42, 531-546.
Boudreau, J. W. (1983a). Economic considerations in estimating the
utility of human resources productivity improvement programs. Personnel Psychology, 36, 551-576.
Boudreau, J. W. (1983b). Effects of employee flows on utility analysis
of human resource productivity improvement programs. Journal of
Applied Psychology, 68, 396-406.
Boudreau, J. W. (1991). Utility analysis for decisions in human resource management. In M. D. Dunnette & L. M. Hough (Eds.),
Handbook of industrial and organizational psychology (2nd ed., Vol.
2, pp. 621 -745). Palo Alto, CA: Consulting Psychologists Press.
Boudreau, J. W., & Berger, C. J. (1985). Decision-theoretic utility analysis applied to employee separations and acquisitions. Journal of Applied Psychology, 70, 581-612.
Brewster, C., Hegewisch, A., Holden, L., & Lockhart, T. (Eds.). (1992).
The European human resource management guide. San Diego, CA:
Academic Press.
Brogden, H. (1949). When testing pays off. Personnel Psychology, 2,
171-183.
Cascio, W. F, & Morris, J. C. (1990). A critical reanalysis of Hunter,
Schmidt, and Coggin's (1988) "Problems and pitfalls in using capital
budgeting and financial accounting techniques in assessing the utility
of personnel programs." Journal of Applied Psychology, 75,410-417.
Cronbach, L., & Gleser, G. (1965). Psychological tests and personnel
decisions. Urbana: University of Illinois Press.
Hogarth, R. M., & Einhorn, H. J. (1976). Optimal strategies for personnel selection when candidates can refuse job offers. Journal of
Business, 49, 479-495.

Hsu, L. M. (1982). Estimation of the relative value of employee selection tests from information commonly available in the presence of
direct and indirect range restriction. Journal of Applied Psychology,
67.509-511.
Judiesch, M. K., Schmidt, F. L., & Mount, M. K. (1992). Estimates of
the dollar value of employee output in utility analysis: An empirical
test of two theories. Journal of Applied Psychology, 77, 234-250.
Kao, R. C., & Rowan, T. C. (1959). A model for personnel recruiting
and selection. Management Science, 5, 192-203.
Martin, S. L., & Raju, N. S. (1992). Determining cutoff scores that
optimize utility: A recognition of recruiting costs. Journal of Applied
Psychology, 77, 15-23.
Milkovich, G. T., & Boudreau, J. W. (1991). Human resource management. Homewood, IL: Irwin.
Murphy, K. (1986). When your top choice turns you down: Effect of
rejected offers on the utility of selection tests. Psychological Bulletin,
99, 133-138.
Muthen, B. (1990). Moments of the censored and truncated bivariate
normal distribution. British Journal of Mathematical and Statistical
Psychology, 43, 131-143.
Numerical Algorithms Group. (1990). The NAG FORTRAN library
manual. Mark 14. Oxford, England: Author.
Raju, N. S., Burke, M. J., & Normand, J. (1990). A new approach for
utility analysis. Journal of Applied Psychology, 75, 3-12.
Raju, N. S., Steinhaus, S. D., Edwards, J. E., & DeLessio, J. (1991). A
logistic regression model for personnel selection. Applied Psychological Measurement, 15, 139-152.
Schmidt, F. L., Hunter, J. E., McKenzie, R. C., & Muldrow, T. W.
(1979). Impact of valid selection procedures on workforce productivity. Journal of Applied Psychology, 64, 609-626.
Surgent, L. V. (1947). The use of aptitude tests in the selection of radio
tube mounters. Psychological Monographs, 61 (2, Whole No. 283).
Tallis, G. M. (1961). The moment generating function of the truncated
multinormal distribution. Journal of the Royal Statistical Society,
Series B, 23, 223-229.
Taylor, H. C., & Russell, J. F. (1939). The relationship of validity coefficients to the practical effectiveness of tests in selection: Discussion
and tables. Journal of Applied Psychology, 23, 565-578.
Tiffin, J., & Vincent, N. L. (1960). Comparison of empirical and theoretical expectancies. Personnel Psychology, 13, 59-64.

411

ONE-COHORT SELECTION-RETENTION UTILITY ANALYSIS

Appendix
Extension of the New Utility Model
The extension of the new utility model was inspired by the proposal
of Raju, Burke, and Normand (1990) in that a distinction is made between true and observed scores for both the retention-decision measure
(i.e., rated job performance) and the predictor measure. In addition,
the extension restricts the assumption of bivariate normality to the joint
distribution of the true predictor and performance scores. More specifically, the observed predictor and performance scores, Xo and RO,
respectively, are decomposed into

The density function outlined above makes it possible to estimate, for
example, the mean performance payoff for the successful predictor-selected candidates, where selection and success are both related to the
corresponding observed score:
(A4)

with
poo |.+« ^^ R^g(Rt

This document is copyrighted by the American Psychological Association or one of its allied publishers.
This article is intended solely for the personal use of the individual user and is not to be disseminated broadly.

A"o = AT, + ex, and

Jxc

Ro = R< + eR,

(Al)

Jrc

where X, and Rt denote the true scores and ex and eR denote the corresponding error components that are independent of Xt and /?,, and
where it is assumed that (X%, Rt) ~ N2(ii, 2), with pf = (0,0) and 1 and
p (the correlation between true predictor and true performance scores)
are the diagonal and off-diagonal elements, respectively, of 2. Next, it
is assumed that the regression of job performance payoff, Y, on true
performance rating is linear: E(Y\Rt) = HY + PYx,"YRt: with PYK, the
correlation between Yand Rt. (The simulation results, reported in Table 3, we obtained under the condition that py/j, is also equal to 0.85.)
Finally, ex and eR are considered to be independent, rectangularly distributed random variables with average values equal to 0 and variance
alx = 1 / I2c2x and a2ex = 1 / l2c2K. The joint density of A",, Rt, ex, and
eR can then be written as

XQ

Ro)dR^dRodXQ

Jrc
JRQ— 1 / 2cjj
oo P+oo p^j+l/Zc,

JXff-ltlc,,

(AS)

g(R,,X

To evaluate the triple integrals in the latter quotient, a combination
of quadrature routines from the NAG FORTRAN library (Numerical
Algorithms Group, 1 990 ) is implemented.
Similar developments lead to the estimation of the other components
of Utility Equations 1 and 4. To compute, for example, the mean payoff
of the successful random selectees, the joint distribution of .R, and RO,
RO - 1 /2cR < Rt <

h(Rt,

1 /2cK,
+00,

(A6)

is considered to first obtain the mean true performance score of the
random selectees whose observed performance is at least equal to rc:
f + » TV

t, Rt),

/(AT,, Rt, ex, eR) =

(A2)

Jrc

t, Ro)dRtdRo

Jfip-l/

+i/

rp - h(R ,

with

t

Jrc

JRQ—l/Zcjf

— oo £ Xt, Rt < +00,

(A7)

-1
1
,
— & ex < — , and
2cx
2cx
-1

1

Applying the transformation X, = Xt, Rt = Rt, X0 = Xt + ex and RO =
.Rt + eR and integrating out Xt, the joint density of R,, X0, and RO is
K0-l/2cx-pRt
X0+ l/2cx-pg

, (A3)

The mean payoff of the successful randomly selected candidates, MI-W.
is then equal to py + pY^OYf-n^r^Although the present generalization assumes that the measurement
errors are rectangularly distributed, it is obvious that any other distribution—for example, a triangular or a normal distribution—can be
considered for ex and eR. Alternatively, all assumptions may be dropped,
and the utility calculations could be based on the joint density of the
observed predictor and criterion scores as estimated from previously
gathered sample data. Such an approach seems hardly practical, however, especially when the selection decision relates to the introduction of
a new predictor.

with
-oo < XO,RO& +00, and
- l/2cR< R,£Ro + l/2cK.

Received December 17, 1992
Revision received September 17, 1993
Accepted September 17,1993 •

